That goes double for mind flayers, which absolutely, utterly, and completely do not exist, nor do they
secretly run the D<ZD team. Do we really need a disclaimer to tell you that? You shouldn't use your brain to consider
such irrational thoughts. They only make the mind cluttered, confused, and unpleasantly chewy. A good brain is nice,
tender, and barely used. Go ahead, put down this book and watch some reality TV or Internet cat videos. They're really
funny these days. You won't regret it. We say this only because we love you and your juicy, succulent gamer brain.
pUNCEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of
the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property
of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained
herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast.
Introduction
this bestiary is for storytellers and world-builders. If you have ever thought about
running a Dungeons & Dragons game
I for your friends, either a single night's
adventure or a long-running campaign,
this tome contains page after page of
inspiration. It's your one-stop shop for
creatures both malevolent and benign.
Some of the creatures that inhabit the worlds of
D&D have origins rooted in real-world mythology and
fantasy literature. Other creatures are D&D originals.
The monsters in this book have been culled from all
previous editions of the game. Herein you'll discover
classic critters such as the beholder and the displacer
beast next to more recent creations such as the chuul
and the twig blight. Common beasts mingle with the
weird, the terrifying, and the ridiculous. In collecting
monsters from the past, we've endeavored to reflect the
multifaceted nature of the game, warts and all. D&D
monsters come in all shapes and sizes, with stories that
not only thrill us but also make us smile.
If you're an experienced Dungeon Master (DM), a few
of the monster write-ups might surprise you, for we've
gone into the Monster Manuals of yore and discovered
some long-lost factoids. We've also added a few new
twists. Naturally, you can do with these monsters what
you will. Nothing we say here is intended to curtail
your creativity. If the minotaurs in your world are
shipbuilders and pirates, who are we to argue with you?
It's your world, after all.
How to Use This Book
The best thing about being a DM is that you get to invent
your own fantasy world and bring it to life, and nothing
brings a D&D world to life more than the creatures
that inhabit it. You might read a monster's entry and
be spurred to create an adventure revolving around it,
or you might have an awesome idea for a dungeon and
need just the right monsters to populate it. That's where
the Monster Manual comes in handy.
The Monster Manual is one of three books that form
the foundation of the Dungeons & Dragons game,
the other two being the Player's Handbook and the
Dungeon Master's Guide. The Monster Manual, like
the Dungeon Master's Guide, is a book for DMs. Use it
to populate your D&D adventures with pesky goblins,
stinky troglodytes, savage ores, mighty dragons, and a
veritable horde of creepy crawlies.
Guidelines for creating encounters with monsters can
be found in the Dungeon Master's Guide. That book also
contains wandering monster tables and other goodies
to help you use the monsters in this book in interesting
ways, as well as advice for modifying monsters and
creating your own.
If you've never run a D&D adventure before, we
recommend that you pick up the Dungeons & Dragons
Starter Set, which demonstrates how to take a bunch of
monsters and build an exciting adventure around them.
What Is a Monster?
A monster is denned as any creature that can be
interacted with and potentially fought and killed. Even
something as harmless as a frog or as benevolent as
a unicorn is a monster by this definition. The term
also applies to humans, elves, dwarves, and other
civilized folk who might be friends or rivals to the player
characters. Most of the monsters that haunt the D&D
world, however, are threats that are meant to be stopped:
rampaging demons, conniving devils, soul-sucking
undead, summoned elementals—the list goes on.
This book contains ready-to-play, easy-to-run
monsters of all levels, and for nearly every climate and
terrain imaginable. Whether your adventure takes place
in a swamp, a dungeon, or the outer planes of existence,
there are creatures in this book to populate that
environment.
Where Do Monsters Dwell?
If you are new to the D&D game, you might not be
familiar with the weird and wondrous places where
monsters can be found and fought.
Dungeons
When most people think of a dungeon, images of dark
cells with iron bars and shackles spring to mind. In
the D&D game, the word "dungeon" takes on a broader
meaning to include any enclosed, monster-infested
location. Most dungeons are sprawling underground
complexes. Here are a few other examples:
A ruined wizard's tower atop a lonely hill riddled with
goblin-infested tunnels
A pharaoh's pyramid filled with haunted crypts and
secret treasure vaults
A lost city in the jungle, overgrown with vines and
overrun with demons and demon-worshiping cultists
The icy tomb of a frost giant king
A filthy, labyrinthine sewer system controlled by a
gang of wererats
The Underdark
There is no greater dungeon than the Underdark, the
underworld beneath the surface world. It is a vast
subterranean realm where monsters accustomed to
darkness dwell. It is a place filled with lightless caverns
connected by tunnels that wind ever downward. One
could spend a lifetime (however brief!) exploring the
Underdark and find such places as the following:
A mind flayer prison or asylum, filled with mindless
thralls and raving lunatics
A lost dwarven necropolis containing row after row of
dusty tombs waiting to be plundered
A fortified outpost bristling with armaments, guarding
the way to a magnificent drow city
A subterranean rift filled with giant fungi and ruled by
a megalomaniacal beholder or mad fomorian king
A chain of rocky islands on a vast, sunless sea that's
home to aboleths and insane kuo-toa

The Wilderness
Not all monsters lurk underground. Many of them
inhabit deserts, mountains, swamps, canyons, forests,
and other natural settings. The wilderness can be just
as dangerous as any dungeon, particularly when there's
nowhere to hide! Some wilderness locations are just as
memorable as any dungeon:
A roc's nest made of shattered ship hulls, built atop a
lonely mountain or rocky hill
A vast arctic tundra that serves as a hunting ground
for berserkers and yeti
A primeval forest protected by treants or corrupted by
demon-worshiping gnolls
A fog-shrouded swamp haunted by lizardfolk that
worship a vile black dragon
A jungle island inhabited by dinosaurs and human
tribal warriors
Towns and Cities
Some of the best adventures unfold in the cradles of
civilization. Urban settings afford adventurers the
chance to rub shoulders with the rich and powerful, butt
heads with the dregs of society, and peel back the veneer
of civility to see the monstrous evil lurking beneath.
Within a medieval town or city are places as deadly as
any dungeon:
A clock tower that serves as a base for a guild of
kenku rogues and assassins
A slavers' den hidden in an orphanage run by a
rakshasa disguised as the headmaster
A wizard's academy rife with corruption and practitioners of the necromantic arts
A noble's manor where rich, devil-worshiping cultists
gather to perform sacrifices
A temple, vault, or museum watched day and night by
animated constructs
Underwater
Not all adventures take place on land. This book casts
light on several creatures that haunt the oceans of the
world, from the devilish sahuagin to the peaceful aquatic
elves who loathe them. Within this aquatic domain are
many surprising adventure locations:
A graveyard of sunken ships haunted by sharks,
aquatic ghouls, and angry ghosts
A storm giant's coral castle, beautiful yet foreboding
A lost city on the sea floor, encased in a magic bubble
of air and ruled by a medusa queen
A kraken's cave or bronze dragon's cavernous lair,
filled with ancient treasures
A sunken temple of Sekolah, evil god of the sahuagin
The Planes of Existence
The Abyss. The Nine Hells. The City of Brass. Such
faraway places beckon high-level adventurers to their
doorsteps, defying the brave and the foolhardy to
overthrow their evil masters and unlock their hidden
mysteries. Many powerful, weird creatures live on other
planes of existence, from orderly modrons to murderous
demons. When it comes to interesting adventure
locations, not even the sky is the limit when you pass
beyond the boundaries of the world:
A pit fiend's stronghold on Avernus, the first layer of
the Nine Hells
A haunted castle in the Shadowfell that serves as a
shadow dragon's lair
An elf queen's tomb in the Feywild
A djinni's palace on the Elemental Plane of Air, filled
with marvelous stolen treasures
A lich's secret demiplane, where the undead archmage
hides its phylactery and spellbook
See the Dungeon Master's Guide for more information
on the planes of existence.
What Monsters to Use?
Many monsters inhabit dungeons, while others live in
deserts, forests, labyrinths, and other environments.
Regardless of which environment a monster
traditionally calls home, you can place it anywhere
you want. After all, "fish out of water" stories are
memorable, and sometimes it's fun to surprise players
with gricks hiding under the desert sands or a dryad
living in a giant mushroom in the Underdark.
Statistics
A monster's statistics, sometimes referred to as its stat
block, provide the essential information that you need
to run the monster.
Size
A monster can be Tiny, Small, Medium, Large, Huge,
or Gargantuan. The Size Categories table shows how
jjjuch space a creature of a particular size controls
in combat. See the Player's Handbook for more
information on creature size and space.
Size Categories
Size	Space		Examples
Tiny	2V2 by 2V2 ft.		Imp, sprite
Small	5 by 5 ft.		Giant rat, goblin
Medium	5 by 5 ft.		Ore, werewolf
Large	10 by 10 ft.		Hippogriff, ogre
Huge	15 by 15 ft.		Fire giant, treant
Gargantuan	20 by 20 ft. or	larger	Kraken, purple worm
Modifying Creatures
Despite the versatile collection of monsters in this book,
you might be at a loss when it comes to finding the perfect
creature for part of an adventure. Feel free to tweak an
existing creature to make it into something more useful for
you, perhaps by borrowing a trait or two from a different
monster or by using a variant or template, such as the
ones in this book. Keep in mind that modifying a monster,
including when you apply a template to it, might change its
challenge rating.
For advice on how to customize creatures and calculate
their challenge ratings, see the Dungeon Master's Guide.
A monger's type speaks to its fundamental nafufe.
Certain spells, magic items, class features, and other
effects in the game interact in special ways with
creatures of a particular type. For example, an arrow of
dragon slaying deals extra damage not only to dragons
but also other creatures of the dragon type, such as
dragon turtles and wyverns.
The game includes the following monster types, which
have no rules of their own.
Aberrations are utterly alien beings. Many of them
have innate magical abilities drawn from the creature's
alien mind rather than the mystical forces of the world.
The quintessential aberrations are aboleths, beholders,
mind flayers, and slaadi.
Beasts are nonhumanoid creatures that are a natural
part of the fantasy ecology. Some of them have magical
powers, but most are unintelligent and lack any society
or language. Beasts include all varieties of ordinary
animals, dinosaurs, and giant versions of animals.
Celestials are creatures native to the Upper Planes.
Many of them are the servants of deities, employed
as messengers or agents in the mortal realm and
throughout the planes. Celestials are good by nature,
so the exceptional celestial who strays from a good
alignment is a horrifying rarity. Celestials include
angels, couatls, and pegasi.
Constructs are made, not born. Some are
programmed by their creators to follow a simple set of
instructions, while others are imbued with sentience
and capable of independent thought. Golems are the
iconic constructs. Many creatures native to the outer
plane of Mechanus, such as modrons, are constructs
shaped from the raw material of the plane by the will of
more powerful creatures.
Dragons are large reptilian creatures of ancient origin
and tremendous power. True dragons, including the
good metallic dragons and the evil chromatic dragons,
are highly intelligent and have innate magic. Also in this
category are creatures distantly related to true dragons,
but less powerful, less intelligent, and less magical, such
as wyverns and pseudodragons.
Elementals are creatures native to the elemental
planes. Some creatures of this type are little more than
animate masses of their respective elements, including
the creatures simply called elementals. Others have
biological forms infused with elemental energy. The
races of genies, including djinn and efreet, form the
most important civilizations on the elemental planes.
Other elemental creatures include azers, invisible
stalkers, and water weirds.
Fey are magical creatures closely tied to the forces of
nature. They dwell in twilight groves and misty forests.
In some worlds, they are closely tied to the Feywild, also
called the Plane of Faerie. Some are also found in the
Outer Planes, particularly the planes of Arborea and the
Beastlands. Fey include dryads, pixies, and satyrs.
Fiends are creatures of wickedness that are native
to the Lower Planes. A few are the servants of deities,
but many more labor under the leadership of archdevils
and demon princes. Evil priests and mages sometimes
summon fiends to the material world to do their bidding.
If an evil celestial is attarity, a good fiend is almost
inconceivable. Fiends include demons, devils, hell
hounds, rakshasas, and yugoloths.
Giants tower over humans and their kind. They are
humanlike in shape, though some have multiple heads
(ettins) or deformities (fomorians). The six varieties of
true giant are hill giants, stone giants, frost giants, fire
giants, cloud giants, and storm giants. Besides these,
creatures such as ogres and trolls are giants.
Humanoids are the main peoples of the D&D
world, both civilized and savage, including humans
and a tremendous variety of other species. They have
language and culture, few if any innate magical abilities
(though most humanoids can learn spellcasting), and a
bipedal form. The most common humanoid races are
the,ones most suitable as player characters: humans,
dwarves, elves, and halflings. Almost as numerous but
far more savage and brutal, and almost uniformly evil,
are the races of goblinoids (goblins, hobgoblins, and
bugbears), ores, gnolls, lizardfolk, and kobolds.
A variety of humanoids appear throughout this book,
but the races detailed in the Player's Handbook with
the exception of drow are dealt with in appendix B.
That appendix gives you a number of stat blocks that
you can use to make various members of those races.
Monstrosities are monsters in the strictest sense-
frightening creatures that are not ordinary, not truly
natural, and almost never benign. Some are the
results of magical experimentation gone awry (such
as owlbears), and others are the productof terrible
curses (including rjiinotaurs and yuan-ti). They defy
categorization, and in some sense serve as a catch-all
category for creatures that don't fit into any other type.
Oozes are gelatinous creatures that rarely have a
fixed shape. They are mostly subterranean, dwelling
in caves and dungeons and feeding on refuse, carrion,
or creatures unlucky enough to get in their way. Black
puddings and gelatinous cubes are among the most
recognizable oozes.
Plants in this context are vegetable creatures, not
ordinary flora. Most of them are ambulatory, and some
are carnivorous. The quintessential plants are the
shambling mound and the treant. Fungal creatures
such as the gas spore and the myconid also fall into
this category.
Undead are once-living creatures brought to a
horrifying state of undeath through the practice of
necromantic magic or some unholy curse. Undead
include walking corpses, such as vampires and zombies,
as well as bodiless spirits, such as ghosts and specters.
Tags
A monster might have one or more tags appended to
its type, in parentheses. For example, an ore has the
humanoid (ore) type. The parenthetical tags provide
additional categorization for certain creatures. The tags
have no rules of their own, but something in the game,
such as a magic item, might refer to them. For instance,
a spear that is especially effective at fighting demons
would work against any monster that has the demon tag.
Alignment
A monster's alignment provides a clue to its disposition
and how it behaves in a roleplaying or combat situation.
For example, a chaotic evil monster might be difficult
to reason with and might attack characters on sight,
whereas a neutral monster might be willing to negotiate.
See the Player's Handbook for descriptions of the
different alignments.
The alignment specified in a monster's stat bloc'K'is
the default. Feel free to depart from it and change a
monster's alignment to suit the needs of your campaign.
If you want a good-aligned green dragon or
giant, there's nothing stopping you.
Some creatures can have any alignment. In other
words, you choose the monster's alignment. Sometimes
monster's alignment entry indicates a tendency or
aversion toward law, chaos, good, or evil. For example,
a berserker can be any chaotic alignment (chaotic good,
chaotic neutral, or chaotic evil), as befits its wild nature.
Many creatures of low intelligence have no
comprehension of law or chaos, good or evil. They don't
make moral or ethical choices, but rather act on instinct.
These creatures are unaligned, which means they don't
have an alignment.
Armor Class
A monster that wears armor or carries a shield has
an Armor Class (AC) that takes its armor, shield, and
Dexterity into account. Otherwise, a monster's AC is
based on its Dexterity modifier and natural armor,
if any. If a monster has natural armor, wears armor,
or carries a shield, this is noted in parentheses after
its AC value.
Hit Points
A monster usually dies or is destroyed when it
drops to 0 hit points. For more on hit points, see the
Player's Handbook.
A monster's hit points are presented both as a die
expression and as an average number. For example,
a monster with 2d8 hit points has 9 hit points on
average (2 x 4V4).
A monster's size determines the die used to calculate
its hit points, as shown in the Hit Dice by Size table.
Hit Dice by Monster Size	s	ZE	Hit Die	Average HP per Die
Tiny			d4	21/2
Small			d6	3V2
Medium			d8	4V2
Large			dlO	5V2
Huge			d!2	6V2
Gargantuan			d20	10V2
A monster's Constitution modifier also affects the
number of hit points it has. Its Constitution modifier is
multiplied by the number of Hit Dice it possesses, and
the result is added to its hit points. For example, if a
monster has a Constitution of 12 (+1 modifier) and 2(18
Hit Dice, it has 2d8 + 2 hit points (average 11).
Speed
A monster's speed tells you how far it can move on
its turn. For more information on speed, see the
Player's Handbook.
All creatures have a walking speed, simply called the
monster's speed. Creatures that have no form of ground-
based locomotion have a walking speed of 0 feet.
Some creatures have one or more of the following
additional movement modes.
Burrow
A monster that has a burrowing speed can use that
speed to move through sand, earth, mud, or ice. A
monster can't burrow through solid rock unless it has a
special trait that allows it to do so.
Climb
A monster that has a climbing speed can use all or
part of its movement to move on vertical surfaces. The
monster doesn't need to spend extra movement to climb.
FLY
A monster that has a flying speed can use all or part
of its movement to fly. Some monsters have the ability
to hover, which makes them hard to knock out of the
air (as explained in the rules on flying in the Player's
Handbook). Such a monster stops hovering when it dies.
Swim
A monster that has a swimming speed doesn't need to
spend extra movement to swim.
Ability Scores
Every monster has six ability scores (Strength,
Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and
Charisma) and corresponding modifiers. For more
information on ability scores and how they're used in
play, see the Player's Handbook.
Throws
The Saving Throws entry is reserved for creatures
that are adept at resisting certain kinds of effects.
For example, a creature that isn't easily charmed or
frightened might gain a bonus on its Wisdom saving
throws. Most creatures don't have special saving throw
bonuses, in which case this section is absent.
A saving throw bonus is the sum of a monster's relevant
ability modifier and its proficiency bonus, which is
determined by the monster's challenge rating (as shown
in the Proficiency Bonus by Challenge Rating table).
Proficiency Bonus by Challenge Rating
Proficiency
Challenge             Bonus
Challenge	Proficiency Bonus
0 1/8	+2 +2
1/4	+2
1/2 1	+2 +2
2	+2
3	+2
4	+2
5	+3
6	+3
7	+3
8	+3
9	+4
10	+4
n	+4
12	+4
13	+5
Skills
14	+5
15	+5
16	+5
17	+6
18	+6
19	+6
20	+6
21	+7
22	+7
23	+7
24 25	+7 +8
26	+8
27	+8
28	+8
29	+9
30	+9
The Skills entry is reserved for monsters that are
proficient in one or more skills. For example, a monster
that is very perceptive and stealthy might have bonuses
to Wisdom (Perception) and Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
A skill bonus is the sum of a monster's relevant
ability modifier and its proficiency bonus, which is
determined by the monster's challenge rating (as
shown in the Proficiency Bonus by Challenge Rating
table). Other modifiers might apply. For instance, a
monster might have a larger-than-expected bonus
(usually double its proficiency bonus) to account for
its heightened expertise.
Vulnerabilities, Resistances,
and Immunities
Some creatures have vulnerability, resistance, or
immunity to certain types of damage. Additionally,
some creatures are immune to certain conditions. If a
monster is immune to a game effect that isn't considered
damage or a condition, it has a special trait.
Senses
The Senses entry notes a monster's passive
Wisdom (Perception) score, as well as any special
senses the monster might have. Special senses are
described below.
Blindsight
A monster with blindsight can perceive its surroundings
without relying on sight, within a specific radius.
Creatures without eyes, such as grimlocks and gray
oozes, typically have this special sense, as do creatures
with echolocation or heightened senses, such as bats
and true dragons.
If a monster is naturally blind, it has a parenthetical
note to this effect, indicating that the radius of its
blindsight defines the maximum range of its perception.

I Armor, Weapon, and Tool Proficiencies
Assume that a creature is proficient with its armor, weapons,
I and tools. If you swap them out, you decide whether the
| creature is proficient with its new equipment.
For example, a hill giant typically wears hide armor and
wields a greatclub. You could equip a hill giant with chain
mail and a greataxe instead, and assume the giant is
| proficient with both, one or the other, or neither.
See the Player's Handbook for rules on using armor or
weapons without proficiency.

Darkvision
A monster with darkvision can see in the dark within a
specific radius. The monster can see in dim light within
the radius as if it were bright light, and in darkness as
if it were dim light. The monster can't discern color in
darkness, only shades of gray. Many creatures that live
underground have this special sense.
Tremorsense
A monster with tremorsense can detect and pinpoint
the origin of vibrations within a specific radius,
provided that the monster and the source of the
vibrations are in contact with the same ground or
substance. Tremorsense can't be used to detect flying or
incorporeal creatures. Many burrowing creatures, such
as ankhegs and umber hulks, have this special sense.
Truesight
A monster with truesight can, out to a specific range, see
in normal and magical darkness, see invisible creatures
and objects, automatically detect visual illusions and
succeed on saving throws against them, and perceive
the original form of a shapechanger or a creature that
is transformed by magic. Furthermore, the monster can
see into the Ethereal Plane within the same range.
Languages
The languages that a monster can speak are listed
in alphabetical order. Sometimes a monster can
understand a language but can't speak it, and this is
noted in its entry. A "—" indicates that a creature neither
speaks nor understands any language.
Telepathy
Telepathy is a magical ability that allows a monster to
communicate mentally with another creature within a
specified range. The contacted creature doesn't need
to share a language with the monster to communicate
in this way with it, but it must be able to understand at
least one language. A creature without telepathy can
receive and respond to telepathic messages but can't
initiate or terminate a telepathic conversation.
A telepathic monster doesn't need to see a contacted
creature and can end the telepathic contact at any time.
The contact is broken as soon as the two creatures are
no longer within range of each other or if the telepathic
monster contacts a different creature within range. A
telepathic monster can initiate or terminate a telepathic
conversation without using an action, but while the
monster is incapacitated, it can't initiate telepathic
contact, and any current contact is terminated.
A creature within the area of an antimagic field or in
any other location where magic doesn't function can't
send or receive telepathic messages.

Challenge
A monster's challenge rating tells you how great a
threat the monster is. An appropriately equipped and
well-rested party of four adventurers should be able to
defeat a monster that has a challenge rating equal to its
level without suffering any deaths. For example, a party
of four 3rd-level characters should find a monster with
a challenge rating of 3 to be a worthy challenge, but not
a deadly one.
Monsters that are significantly weaker than lst-level
characters have a challenge rating lower than 1.
Monsters with a challenge rating of 0 are insignificant
except in large numbers; those with no effective attacks
are worth no experience points, while those that have
attacks are worth 10 XP each.
Some monsters present a greater challenge than
even a typical 20th-level party can handle. These
monsters have a challenge rating of 21 or higher and are
specifically designed to test player skill.
Experience Points
The number of experience points (XP) a monster is
worth is based on its challenge rating. Typically, XP is
awarded for defeating the monster, although the DM
may also award XP for neutralizing the threat posed by
the monster in some other manner.
Unless something tells you otherwise, a monster
summoned by a spell or other magical ability is worth
the XP noted in its stat block.
The Dungeon Master's Guide explains how to create
encounters using XP budgets, as well as how to adjust
an encounter's difficulty.
Experience Points by Challenge Rating
Challenge	XP
0 1/8 1/4	OorlO 25 50
1/2 1	100 200
2	450
3	700
4	1,100
5	1,800
6	2,300
7	2,900
8	3,900
9 10 11	5,000 5,900 7,200
12 13	8,400 10,000
Challenge 14 15 16	XP 11,500 13,000 15,000
17	18,000
18	20,000
19	22,000
20	25,000
21	33,000
22	41,000
23	50,000
24	62,000
25	75,000
26	90,000
27 28	105,000 120,000
29 30	135,000 155,000
/

Special Traits
Special traits (which appear after a monster's challenge
rating but before any actions or reactions) are
characteristics that are likely to be relevant in a combat
encounter and that require some explanation.
Innate Spellcasting
A monster with the innate ability to cast spells has
the Innate Spellcasting special trait. Unless noted
otherwise, an innate spell of 1st level or higher is
always cast at its lowest possible level and can't be cast
at a higher level. If a monster has a cantrip where its
level matters and no level is given, use the monster's
challenge rating.
An innate spell can have special rules or restrictions.
For example, a drow mage can innately cast the levitate
spell, but the spell has a "self only" restriction, which
means that the spell affects only the drow mage.
A monster's innate spells can't be swapped out with
other spells. If a monster's innate spells don't require
attack rolls, no attack bonus is given for them.
Spellcasting
A monster with the Spellcasting class feature has a
spellcaster level and spell slots, which it uses to cast
its spells of 1st level and higher (as explained in the
Player's Handbook). The spellcaster level is also used
for any cantrips included in the feature.
The monster has a list of spells known or prepared
from a particular class. The list might also include
spells from a feature in that class, such as the Divine
Domain feature of the cleric or the .Druid Circle feature
of the druid.
A monster can cast a spell from its list at a higher level
if it has the spell slot to do so. For example, a drow mage
with the 3rd-level lightning bolt spell can cast it as a
5th-level spell by using one of its 5th-level spell slots.
You can change the spells that a monster knows or
has prepared, replacing any spell on a monster's spell
list with a different spell of the same level and from
the same class list. If you do so, you might cause the
monster to be a greater or lesser threat than suggested
by its challenge rating.
PSIONICS
A monster that casts spells using only the power of its
mind has the psionics tag added to its Spellcasting or
Innate Spellcasting special trait. This tag carries no
special rules of its own, but other parts of the game
might refer to it. A monster that has this tag typically
doesn't require any components to cast its spells.
Actions
When a monster takes its action, it can choose from the
options in the Actions section of its stat block or use one
of the actions available to all creatures, such as the Dash
or Hide action, as described in the Player's Handbook.
Melee and Ranged Attacks
The most common actions that a monster will take in
combat are melee and ranged attacks. These can be
spell attacks or weapon attacks, where the "weapon"
might be a irisiriufactured item or a natural weapon, such
afe a claw or tail spike; For more information on different
kinds of attacks, see the Player's Handbook.
Creature vs. Target. The target of a melee or ranged
attack is usually either one creature or one target,
the difference being that a "target" can be a creature
or an object.
Hit. Any damage dealt or other effects that occur as
a result of an attack hitting a target are described after
the "Hit" notation. You have the option of taking average
damage or rolling the damage; for this reason, both the
average damage and the die expression are presented.
Miss. If an attack has an effect that occurs on a miss,
that information is presented after the "Miss:" notation.
MULTIATTACK
A creature that can make multiple attacks on its
turn has the Multiattack ability. A creature can't use
Multiattack when making an opportunity attack, which
must be a single melee attack.
Ammunition
A monster carries enough ammunition to make its
ranged attacks. You can assume that a monster has 2d4
pieces of ammunition for a thrown weapon attack, and
2dl0 pieces of ammunition for a projectile weapon such
as a bow or crossbow.
If a monster can do something special with its reaction,
that information is contained here. If a creature has no
special reaction, this section is absent.
Limited Usage
Some special abilities have restrictions on the number
of times they can be used.
X/Day. The notation "X/Day" means a special ability
can be used X number of times and that a monster must
finish a long rest to regain expended uses. For example,
"1/Day" means a special ability can be used once and
that the monster must finish a long rest to use it again.
Recharge X-Y. The notation "Recharge X-Y" means
a monster can use a special ability once and that the
ability then has a random chance of recharging during
each subsequent round of combat. At the start of each
of the monster's turns, roll a d6. If the roll is one of the
numbers in the recharge notation, the monster regains
the use of the special ability. The ability also recharges
when the monster finishes a short or long rest.
Grapple Rules for Monsters
Many monsters have special attacks that allow them to
quickly grapple prey. When a monster hits with such an
attack, it doesn't need to make an additional ability check to
determine whether the grapple succeeds, unless the attack
says otherwise.
A creature grappled by the monster can use its action to try
to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a Strength (Athletics)
or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check against the escape DC in the
monster's stat block. If no escape DC is given, assume the
DC is 10 + the monster's Strength (Athletics) modifier.
For example, "Recharge 5-6" means a monstefWah;
use the special ability once. Then, at the start of the
monster's turn, it regains the use of that ability if it rolls
a 5 or 6 on a d6.
Recharge after a Short or Long Rest. This notation
means that a monster can use a special ability once and
then must finish a short or long rest to use it again'
Equipment
A stat block rarely refers to equipment, othepthan
armor or weapons used by a monster. A creature that
customarily wears clothes, such as a humanoid
assumed to be dressed appropriately.
You can equip monsters with additional gear and
trinkets however you like, using the equipment chapter
of the Player's Handbook for inspiration, and you decide
how much of a monster's equipment is recoverable after
the creature is slain and whether any of that equipment
is still usable. A battered suit of armor made for a
monster is rarely usable by someone else, for instance.
If a spellcasting monster needs material components
to cast its spells, assume that it has the material
components it needs to cast the spells in its stat block.
Legendary Creatures
A legendary creature can do things that ordinary
creatures can't. Legendary creatures can take special
actions outside their turns, and a few can exert power
over their environment, causing extraordinary magical
effects to occur in their vicinity.
Legendary Actions
A legendary creature can take a certain number of
special actions—called legendary actions—outsidp its
turn. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. A
legendary creature regains spent legendary actions at
the start of its turn. It isn't required to use its legendary
actions, and it can't use legendary actions while
incapacitated.
A Legendary Creature's Lair
A legendary creature might have a section describing
its lair and the special effects it can create while there,
either by act of will or simply by being present. Not all
legendary creatures have lairs. This section only applies
to legendary creatures that spend a great deal of time in
their lairs and are most likely to be encountered there,
Lair Actions
If a legendary creature has lair actions, it can use them
to harness the ambient magic in its lair. On initiative
count 20 (losing all initiative ties), the creature can
use one of its lair action options, or forgo using any of
them that round.
Regional Effects
The mere presence of a legendary creature can have
strange and wondrous effects on its environment, as
noted in this section. Regional effects end abruptly or
dissipate over time when the legendary creature dies.


Medium humanoid (aarakocra), neutral good
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 20 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)      11 (+0)     12 (+1)      11 (+0)
Skills Perception +5
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages Auran
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)


Dive Attack. If the aarakocra is flying and dives at least 30 feet
straight toward a target and then hits it with a melee weapon
attack, the attack deals an extra 3 (ld6) damage to the target.
Actions
Talon. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or I
I range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Aarakocra
Aarakocra range the Howling Gyre, an endless storm
of mighty winds and lashing rains that surrounds the
tranquil realm of Aaqa in the Elemental Plane of Air.
Making aerial patrols, these birdlike humanoids guard
the windy borders of their home against invaders from
the Elemental Plane of Earth, such as gargoyles, their
sworn enemies.
Enemies of Elemental Evil. In service to the Wind
Dukes of Aaqa, aarakocra scout the planes in search
of temples of Elemental Evil. They spy on malign
elemental creatures and then either take the fight to
those creatures or report back to the Wind Dukes.
On the Material Plane, aarakocra create aeries atop
the highest mountains, especially peaks near portals
to the Elemental Plane of Air. From such heights,
aarakocra watch for signs of elemental incursions,
as well as for nascent threats to their home plane.
Aarakocra prefer to live their lives like the wind-
unburdened and ever moving—yet they watch over a
region for years if that's what it takes to guard against
the incursions of Elemental Evil.
Aarakocra have no concept of political borders or
property ownership, and the value of gems, gold, and
other precious materials means little to aarakocra. In
their eyes, a creature should use what is necessary and
then cast what is left on the wind for others to use.
Search for the Seven Shards. The Wind Dukes
of Aaqa come from a race of elemental beings called
the vaati, which once ruled many worlds. A creature
known as the Queen of Chaos arose and initiated an
interplanar war against vaati rule. To combat the threat,
seven vaati heroes combined their powers to create
the mighty Rod of Law. In a battle against the queen's
greatest general, Mishka the Wolf Spider, a vaati killed
Mishka by thrusting the rod into him like a spear. The
rod shattered into seven shards that scattered across
the multiverse. Aaracokra seek signs of the pieces'
locations in order to rebuild what is now know as the
Rod of Seven Parts.
Summoning Air Elementals
Five aarakocra within 30 feet of each other can magically
summon an air elemental. Each of the five must use its
action and movement on three consecutive turns to perform
an aerial dance and must maintain concentration while
doing so (as if concentrating on a spell). When all five have
finished their third turn of the dance, the elemental appears
in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of them. It is friendly
toward them and obeys their spoken commands. It remains
for 1 hour, until it or all its summoners die, or until any of
its summoners dismisses it as a bonus action. A summoner
can't perform the dance again until it finishes a short rest.
When the elemental returns to the Elemental Plane of Air, any
aarakocra within 5 feet of it can return with it.
18
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 135 (18dl0 + 36)
Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX
21 (+5)       9 (-1)
CON
15 (+2)
INT          WIS
18 (+4)     15 (+2)
CHA
18 (+4)

Saving Throws Con +6, Int +8, Wis +6
Skills History+12, Perception +10
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Amphibious. The aboleth can breathe air and water.
Mucous Cloud. While underwater, the aboleth is surrounded
by transformative mucus. A creature that touches the aboleth
or that hits it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it must
make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw. On a failure, the
creature is diseased for ld4 hours. The diseased creature can
breathe only underwater.
Probing Telepathy. If a creature communicates telepathically
with the aboleth, the aboleth learns the creature's greatest
desires if the aboleth can see the creature.
Actions
Muliiattack. The aboleth makes three tentacle attacks.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw

or become diseased. The disease has no effect for 1 minute and
can be removed by any magic that cures disease. After 1 minute,
the diseased creature's skin becomes translucent and slirhy,' the
creature can't regain hit points unless it is underwater, and the
disease can be removed only by heal or another disease-curing
spell of 6th level or higher. When the creature is outside a body
of water, it takes 6 (ldl2) acid damage every 10 minutes unless
moisture is applied to the skin before 10 minutes have passed.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft. one target.
Hit: 15 (3d6+ 5) bludgeoning damage.
Enslave (3/Day). The aboleth targets one creature it can see
within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 14
Wisdom saving throw or be magically charmed by the aboleth
until the aboleth dies or until it is on a different plane of
existence from the target. The charmed target is under the
aboleth's control and can't take reactions, and the aboleth and
the target can communicate telepathically with each other over
any distance.
Whenever the charmed target takes damage, the target can
repeat the saving throw. On a success, the effect ends. No
more than once every 24 hours, the target can also repeat the
saving throw when it is at least 1 mile away from the aboleth.
Legendary Actions
The aboleth can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
aboleth regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The aboleth makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Swipe. The aboleth makes one tail attack.
Psychic Drain (Costs 2 Actions). One creature charmed by the
aboleth takes 10 (3d6) psychic damage, and the aboleth
regains hit points equal to the damage the creature takes.
-Could it be that aboleths are older than
THE GODS ... THAT BEFORE THE DIVINE ONES CAME
TO BE, SUCH HORRORS SHAPED THE MULTIVERSE?
HOW THERE'S A CHILLING THOUGHT."
-VAQJR ZEKH'R, GITHTERAI PHILOSOPHER AND
author of THE FAR REALM: REAL YET UNREAL
Aboleth
Before the coming of the gods, aboleths lurked in
primordial oceans and underground lakes. They
reached out with their minds and seized control of the
burgeoning life-forms of the mortal realm, making those
creatures their slaves. Their dominance made them
like gods. Then the true gods appeared, smashing the
aboleths' empire and freeing their slaves.
Aboleths have never forgotten.
Eternal Memories. Aboleths have flawless memories.
They pass on their knowledge and experience from
generation to generation. Thus, the injury of their defeat
by the gods remains perfectly preserved in their minds.
Aboleths' minds are treasure troves of ancient lore,
recalling moments from prehistory with perfect clarity.
They plot patiently and intricately across eons. Few
creatures can conceive of the extent of an aboleth's plan.
Gods in the Lake. Aboleths dwell in watery
environments, including ocean abysses, deep lakes,
and the Elemental Plane of Water. In these domains
and the lands that adjoin them, aboleths are like gods,
demanding worship and obedience from their subjects.
When they consume other creatures, aboleths add
the knowledge and experiences of their prey to their
eternal memories.
Aboleths use their telepathic powers to read the minds
of creatures and know their desires. An aboleth uses
this knowledge to gain a creature's loyalty, promising to
fulfill such wants in exchange for obedience. Within its
lair, the aboleth can further use its powers to override
senses, granting creatures, such as its followers, the
illusion of promised rewards.
Enemies of the Gods. The aboleths' fall from power
is written in stark clarity on their flawless memories,
for aboleths never truly die. If an aboleth's body is
destroyed, its spirit returns to the Elemental Plane
of Water, where a new body coalesces for it over
days or months.
Ultimately, aboleths dream of overthrowing the
gods and regaining control of the world. Aboleths have
had untold eons to plot and to prepare their plans for
perfept execution.
Aboleths lair ih subterranean lakes or the rocky depths
of the ocean, often surrounded by the ruins of an
ancient, fallen aboleth city. An aboleth spends most of
its existence underwater, surfacing occasionally to treat
with visitors or deranged worshipers.
Lair Actions
When fighting inside its lair, an aboleth can invoke the
ambient magic to take lair actions. On initiative count 20
(losing initiative ties), the aboleth takes a lair action to
cause one of the following effects:
The aboleth casts phantasmal force (no components
required) on any number of creatures it can see within
60 feet of it. While maintaining concentration on this
effect, the aboleth can't take other lair actions. If a tar-
get succeeds on the saving throw or if the effect ends
for it, the target is immune to the aboleth's phantasmal
force lair action for the next 24 hours, although such a
creature can choose to be affected.
Pools of water within 90 feet of the aboleth surge out-
ward in a grasping tide. Any creature on the ground
within 20 feet of such a pool must succeed on a DC 14
Strength saving throw or be pulled up to 20 feet into
the water and knocked prone. The aboleth can't use
this lair action again until it has used a different one.
Water in the aboleth's lair magically becomes a con-
duit for the creature's rage. The aboleth can target any
number of creatures it can see in such water within 90
feet of it. A target must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom
saving throw or take 7 (2d6) psychic damage. The
aboleth can't use this lair action again until it has used
a different one.
Regional Effects
The region containing an aboleth's lair is warped by the
creature's presence, which creates one or more of the
following effects:
Underground surfaces within 1 mile of the aboleth's
lair are slimy and wet and are difficult terrain.
Water sources within 1 mile of the lair are supernat-
urally fouled. Enemies of the aboleth that drink such
water vomit it within minutes.
As an action, the aboleth can create an illusory image
of itself within 1 mile of the lair. The copy can appear
at any location the aboleth has seen before or in any
location a creature charmed by the aboleth can cur-
rently see. Once created, the image lasts for as long
as the aboleth maintains concentration, as if concen-
trating on a spell. Although the image is intangible,
it looks, sounds, and can move like the aboleth. The
aboleth can sense, speak, and use telepathy from the
image's position as if present at that position. If the
image takes any damage, it disappears.
If the aboleth dies, the first two effects fade over the
course of 3dl0 days.
Angels
An angel is a celestial agent sent forth into the planes
to further its god's agenda for weal or woe. Its sublime
beauty and presence can drive awestruck onlookers
to their knees. Yet angels are destroyers too, and their
appearance portends doom as often as it signals hope.
Shards of the Divine. Angels are formed from the
astral essence of benevolent gods and are thus divine
beings of great power and foresight.
Angels act out the will of their gods with tireless
devotion. Even chaotic good deities command lawful
good angels, knowing that the angels' dedication to
order best allows them to fulfill divine commands. An
angel follows a single driving purpose, as decreed by
its deity. However, an angel is incapable of following
commands that stray from the path of law and good.
An angel slays evil creatures without remorse. As the
embodiment of law and good, an angel is almost never
mistaken in its judgments. This quality can create a
sense of superiority in an angel, a sense that comes to
the fore when an angel's task conflicts with the goals of
another creature. The angel never acquiesces or gives
way. When an angel is sent to aid mortals, it is sent not
to serve but to command. The gods of good therefore
send their angels among mortals only in response to the
most dire circumstances.
Fallen Angels. An angel's moral compass grants
it a sense of infallibility that can sometimes spell
its undoing. Angels are usually too wise to fall for a
simple deception, but sometimes pride can lead one to
commit an evil act. Whether intentional or accidental,
such an act is a permanent stain that marks the angel
as an outcast.
Fallen angels retain their power but lose their
connection to the deities from which they were made.
Most fallen angels take their banishment personally,
rebelling against the powers they served by seeking
rulership over a section of the Abyss or a place among
other fallen in the hierarchy of the Nine Hells. Zariel,
the ruler of the first layer of the Nine Hells, is such a
creature. Rather than rebel, some fallen angels resign
themselves to an isolated existence on the Material
Plane, living in disguise as simple hermits. If they are
redeemed, they can become powerful allies dedicated to
justice and compassionate service.
Immortal Nature. An angel doesn't require food,
drink, or sleep.
Deva
Devas are angels that act as divine messengers or
agents to the Material Plane, the Shadowfell, and the
Feywild and that can assume a form appropriate to the
realm they are sent to.
Legend tells of angels that take mortal form for years,
lending aid, hope, and courage to goodhearted folk. A
deva can take any shape, although it prefers to appear
to mortals as an innocuous humanoid or animal. When
circumstances require that it cast off its guise, a deva is
a beautiful humanoid-like creature with silvery skin. Its
hair and eyes gleam with an unearthly luster, and large
feathery wings unfurl from its shoulder blades.
Deva
Medium celestial, lawful good
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16d8 +64)
Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft.
STR
18 (+4)
DEX         CON
18 (+4)      18 (+4)
INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)     20 (+5)     20 (+5)
Saving Throws Wis +9, Cha +9
Skills Insight +7, Perception +9
Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened
[ Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Angelic Weapons. The deva's weapon attacks are magical.
When the deva hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an
extra 4d8 radiant damage (included in the attack).
Innate Spellcasting. The deva's spellcasting ability is Charisma
(spell save DC 17). The deva can innately cast the following
spells, requiring only verbal components:
Magic Resistance. The deva has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical.effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The deva makes two melee attacks.
Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8)
radiant damage.
Healing Touch (3/Day). The deva touches another creature.
The target magically regains 20 (4d8 + 2) hit points and is freed
from any curse, disease, poison, blindness, or deafness.
Change Shape. The deva magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating equal to or
less than its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its
true form if it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is
absorbed or borne by the new form (the deva's choice).
In a new form, the deva retains its game statistics and ability
to speak, but its AC, movement modes, Strength, Dexterity,
and special senses are replaced by those of the new form, and
it gains any statistics and capabilities (except class features,
legendary actions, and lair actions) that the new form has but
that it lacks.
At will: detect evil and good
1/day each: commune, raise dead
Planetar
Planetars act as the weapons of the gods they serve,
presenting a tangible representation of their deities'
might. A planetar can call down rain to relieve a
drought, or can loose an insect plague to devour crops.
A planetar's celestial ears detect every falsehood, and its
radiant eyes see through every deception.
Planetars are muscular and hairless and have
opalescent green skin and white-feathered wings. They
tower over most humanoids, brandishing immense
swords with grace. Sometimes sent to aid powerful
mortals on important tasks for good, planetars are
especially fond of missions that involve battling fiends.
Planetar
Large celestial, lawful good
Armor Class 19 {natural armor)
Hit Points 200 (16dl0 + 112)
Speed 40 ft., fly 120 ft.
STR
24 (+7)
DEX         CON
20 (+5)     24 (+7)
INT
19 (+4)
WIS
22 (+6)
CHA
25 (+7)
: Saving Throws Con +12, Wis +11, Cha +12
Skills Perception +11
Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 21
1 Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP)                                       _
Angelic Weapons. The planetar's weapon attacks are magical.
When the planetar hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an
extra 5d8 radiant damage (included in the attack).
Divine Awareness. The planetar knows if it hears a |ie.
Innate Spellcasting. The planetar's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 20). The planetar can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: detect evil and good, invisibility (self only)
3/day each: blade barrier, dispel evil and good, fame strike,
raise dead
1/day each: commune, control weather, insect plague
Magic Resistance. The planetar has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The planetar makes two melee attacks.
Creatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 21 (4d6 + 7) slashing damage plus 22 (5d8)
radiant damage.
Healing Touch (4/Day). The planetar touches another creature.   I
The target magically regains 30 (6d8 + 3) hit points and is freed
from any curse, disease, poison, blindness, or deafness.
Solar
A solar is godlike in its glory and power.
On the battlefield, the solar's sword flies into the
fray on its own, and a single arrow from a solar's bow
can strike a target dead on contact. So great is a solar's
celestial might that even demon princes shrink at its
resonant commands.
It is said that only twenty-four solars exist. The few
solars that are known are stewards of specific deities.
The others rest in a state of contemplation, waiting for
the time when their services are needed to stave off
some cosmic threat to the cause of good.
Solar
Large celestial, lawful good
j Armor Class 21 (natural armor)
I Hit Points 243 (18dl0+144)
Speed 50 ft., fly 150 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
26 (+8)      22 (+6)     26 (+8)      25 (+7)     25 (+7)    30 (+10)
Saving Throws Int +14, Wis +14, Cha +17
Skills Perception +14
Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
I Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion,
frightened, poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP)
Angelic Weapons. The solar's weapon attacks are magical.
When the solar hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an
extra 6d8 radiant damage (included in the attack).
1 Divine Awareness. The solar knows if it hears a lie.
Innate Spellcasting. The solar's spellcasting ability is Charisma
1 (spell save DC 25). It can innately cast the following spells,
requiring no material components:
1 At will: detect evil and good, invisibility (self only)
3/day each: blade barrier, dispel evil and good, resurrection
1/day each: commune, control weather
Magic Resistance. The solar has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The solar makes two greatsword attacks.
Creatsward. Melee Weapdn Attack; +\5. to,hit, reach 5 ft., -t
one target, Hit: 22 (4d6'+ 8) slashing damage plus 27 (6#$)
radiant damage.
Slaying Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, range
120/600 ft., one target. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage plus
27 (6d8) radiant damage. If the target is a creature that has 100
hit points or fewer, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
saving throw or die.
Flying Sword. The solar releases its greatsword to hover
magically in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of it. If the solar
can see the sword, the solar can mentally command it as a
bonus action to fly up to 50 feet and either make one attack
against a target or return to the solar's hands. If the hovering
sword is targeted by any effect, the solar is considered to be
holding it. The hovering sword falls if the solar dies.
Healing Touch (4/Day). The solar touches another creature.
The target magically regains 40 (8d8 + 4) hit points and is freed
from any curse, disease, poison, blindness, or deafness.
Legendary Actions
The solar can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
solar regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Teleport. The solar magically teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
Searing Burst (Costs 2 Actions). The solar emits magical, divine
energy. Each creature of its choice in a 10-foot radius must
make a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) fire
damage plus 14 (4d6) radiant damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Blinding Gaze (Costs 3 Actions). The solar targets one creature
it can see within 30 feet of it. If the target can see it, the
target must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw
or be blinded until magic such as the lesser restoration spell
removes the blindness.
Animated Objects
Animated objects are crafted with potent magic to follow
the commands of their creators. When not commanded,
they follow the last order they received to the best of
their ability, and can act independently to fulfill simple
instructions. Some animated objects (including many of
those created in the Feywild) might converse fluently or
adopt a persona, but most are simple automatons.
Constructed Nature. An animated object doesn't
require air, food, drink, or sleep.
The magic that animates an object is dispelled when
the construct drops to 0 hit points. An animated object
reduced to 0 hit points becomes inanimate and is too
damaged to be of much use or value to anyone.
imated Armor
This empty steel shell clamors as it moves, heavy
plates banging and grinding against one another like
the vengeful spirit of a fallen knight. Ponderous but
persistent, this magical guardian is almost always a suit
of plate armor.
To add to its menace, animated armor is frequently
enchanted with scripted speech, so the armor can utter
warnings, demand passwords, or deliver riddles. Rare
suits of animated armor are able to carry on an actual
conversation.
A flying sword dances through the air, fighting with the
confidence of a warrior that can't be injured. Swords
are the most common weapons animated with magic.
Axes, clubs, daggers, maces, spears, and even self-
loading crossbows are also known to exist in animated
object form.
Rug of Smothering
Would-be thieves and careless heroes arrive at the
doorsteps of an enemy's abode, eyes and ears alert for
traps, only to end their quest prematurely as the rugs
beneath their feet animate and smother them to death.
A rug of smothering can be made in many different
forms, from a finely woven carpet fit for a queen to
a coarse mat in a peasant's hovel. Creatures with
the ability to sense magic detect the rug's false
magical aura.
In some cases, a rug of smothering is disguised as
a carpet of flying or another beneficial magic item.
However, a character who stands or sits on the rug, or
who attempts to utter a word of command, is quickly
trapped as the rug of smothering rolls itself tightly
around its victim.
Animated Armor
Medium construct, unaligned
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 25 ft.

STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      11 (+0)      13 (+1)       1 (-5)       3 (-4)       1 (-5)
Damage Immunities poison, psychic
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 6
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Antimagic Susceptibility. The armor is incapacitated while in
the area of an antimagic field. If targeted by dispel magic, the
armor must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against the
caster's spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute.
Fake Appearance. While the armor remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a normal suit of armor.
Actions
Multiattack. The armor makes two melee attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
ANIMATE" OBJ
Rug of Smothering

Large construct, unaligned
Flying Sword
Small construct, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 33 (6dl0)
Speed 10 ft.
STR
17 (+3)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
10 (+0)
INT
l(-5)
WIS
3 (-4)
CHA
l(-5)
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 17 (5d6)
[ Speed 0 jft., fly 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
..  12 (+1)       15 (+2)      11 (+0)       1 (-5)       5 (-3)        1 (-5)
i Saving Throws Dex +4
\ Damage Immunities poison, psychic
, Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 7
I Languages —
J Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
1 Antimagic Susceptibility. The sword is incapacitated while in
I the area of an antimagic field. If targeted by dispel magic, the
sword must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against
I the caster's spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute.
I False Appearance. While the sword remains motionless and
I isn't flying, it is indistinguishable from a normal sword.
i Actions
Damage Immunities poison, psychic
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 6
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Antimagic Susceptibility. The rug is incapacitated while in
the area of an antimagic field. If targeted by dispel magic, the
rug must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against the
caster's spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute.
Damage Transfer. While it is grappling a creature, the rug takes
only half the damage dealt to it, and the creature grappled by
the rug takes the other half.
False Appearance. While the rug remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a normal rug.
Actions
^
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
I target. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) slashing damage.
Smother. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
Medium or smaller creature. Hit: The creature is grappled
(escape DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained,
blinded, and at risk of suffocating, and the rug can't smother
■ another target. In addition, at the start of each of the target's
I turns, the target takes 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
20
^NIl^ATED OB.; :
m^^mm


Ankheg
An ankheg resembles an enormous many-legged
insect, its long antennae twitching in response to any
movement around it. Its legs end in sharp hooks adapted
for burrowing and grasping its prey, and its powerful
mandibles can snap a small tree in half.
Lurkers in the Earth. The ankheg uses its powerful
mandibles to dig winding tunnels deep beneath the
ground. When it hunts, an ankheg burrows upward,
waiting below the surface until its antennae detect
movement from above. Then it bursts from the earth
and seizes prey in its mandibles, crushing and grinding
while it secretes acidic digestive enzymes. These
enzymes help dissolve a victim for easy swallowing, but
the ankheg can also squirt acid to take down foes.
Bane of Field and Forest. Although ankhegs receive
a certain portion of their nutrients from the soil through
which they burrow, they must supplement their diet with
fresh meat. Pastures teeming with grazing livestock and
forests rife with game are an ankheg's prime hunting
grounds. Ankhegs are thus the bane of farmers and
rangers everywhere.
Earthen Tunnels. As it burrows through earth, the
ankheg leaves a narrow, partially collapsed tunnel in its
wake. In "these tunnels, one might find the remnants of
molted ankheg chitin, hatched ankheg eggs, or the grisly
remains of ankheg victims, including coins or other
treasures scattered during the creature's attack.
____;__
,  —a
Ankheg
Large monstrosity, unaligned

Armor Class 14 (natural armbr), 11 while prone
Hit Points 39 (6d10 + 6)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
'17 (+3)      11 (+0)      13 (+1)       1 (-5)      13 (+1)       6 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage plus 3 (ld6) acid damage. If
the target is a Large or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape
. DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the ankheg can bite only the
grappled creature and has advantage on attack rolls to do so.
,' Acid Spray (Recharge 6). The ankheg spits acid in a line that is
! 30 feet long and 5 feet wide, provided that it has no creature
i grappled. Each creature in that line must make a DC 13
j Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) acid damage on a failed
; save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Azer
Medium elemental, lawful neutral
Armor Class 17. (natural armor, shield)
Hit Points 39 (6d8+12)
Speed 30 ft.

STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
;'J1'7 (+3)       12 (+1)      15 (+2)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)      10 (+0)
Saving Throws Con +4
| Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses passive Perception 11
I LanguagesIgnan
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Heated Body. A creature that touches the azer or hits it with a
melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (ldlO) fire damage.
i Heated Weapons. When the azer hits with a metal melee
I weapon, it deals an extra 3 (ld6) fire damage (included in
i the attack).
Illumination. The azer sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius and
dim light for an additional 10 feet.
Actions
22
Warhammer. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 8 (ldlO + 3)
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands to make a melee
attack, plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.
i/KI!
Azer   ,
Natives of the'Eiemental Plane of Fire, azers are
master crafters, expert miners, and sworn foes of the
efreet. In appearance and manner, an azer resembles
a male dwarf, but this is a facade. Beneath its metallic-
looking skin, an azer is a being of fire, which outwardly
manifests in its fiery hair and beard.
Made, Not Born. Azers don't reproduce. They are
each crafted from bronze by another azer and
imbued with a portion of the crafter's inner flame.
Each azer is sculpted with unique features. This
crafting process limits the growth of the azer
population and is the primary reason that these
creatures remain rare.
Volcanic Dwellers. Azers dwell in a kingdom
on the border between the Elemental Plane
of Earth and the Elemental Plane of Fire—a
range of mountains and volcanoes whose spires
rise as a series of fortresses. Beneath mountain
peaks, under volcanic calderas, and amid rivers
of magma, azers extract gleaming metals and
glittering gems from the earth. Squads of azer patrol
the passes and tunnels of their realm, fending off the
salamander raiders whose efreet masters order strikes
against the azer kingdom.
Enemies of the Efreet. Long ago, the efreet and
the azers were allies. Azers helped create the City of
Brass, forging that home of the efreet into one of the
most wondrous places in creation, When the azers had
finished their work, the efreet betrayed them, making
a failed attempt to enslave the azers so as to protect
the secrets of the city. Despite occasional raids and
skirmishes, however, the two sides have so far refrained
from all-out conflict. The azers believe that only the
threat of them revealing the hidden ways into the City of
Brass keeps the efreet in check.
Masters of Metal and Gems. Azers are masterful
artisans, and create beautiful works from the gems and
precious metals found in their volcanic habitat. They
rate the value of such treasures above all other things,
sometimes dispatching parties across the planes to seek
out rare metals and gemstones.
When azers are called by magic to the Material Plane,
it is typically to help forge an elaborate magic item or
work of art, for it is said that their skill in such craft
knows no equal.
Living Fire. An azer doesn't require food,
drink, or sleep.
Banshee
When night falls, unlucky travelers hear the faint cries
of the forlorn dead. This woeful spirit is a banshee, a
spiteful creature formed from the spirit of a female elf.
Banshees appear as luminous, wispy forms that
vaguely recall their mortal features. A banshee's face is
wreathed in a wild tangle of hair, its body clad in wispy
rags that flutter and stream around it.
Divine Wrath. Banshees are the undead remnants of
elves who, blessed with great beauty, failed to use their
gift to bring joy to the world. Instead, they used their
beauty to corrupt and control others. Elves afflicted by
the banshee's curse experience no gladness, feeling
only distress in the presence of the living. As the curse
takes its toll, their minds and bodies decay, until death
completes their transformation into undead monsters.
Sorrow Bound. A banshee becomes forever bound to
the place of its demise, unable to venture more than five
miles from there. It is forced to relive every moment of
its life with perfect recall, yet always refuses to accept
responsibility for its doom.
Beauty Hoarders. The vanity that inspired the
banshee's cursed creation persists in undeath. These
creatures covet beautiful objects: fine jewelry, paintings,
statues, and other objects of art. At the same time, a
banshee abhors any mirrored surface, for it can't bear to
see the horror of its own existence. A single glimpse of
itself is enough to send a banshee into a rage.
Undead Nature. A banshee doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Banshee
Medium undead, Chaotid evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 58 (13d8)
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover)
STR
l(-5)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      10 (+0)
INT
12 (+1)
WIS
11 (+0)
CHA
17 (+3)
1 Saving Throws Wis +2, Cha +4
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
I Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
] Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Elvish
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Detect Life. The banshee can magically sense the presence
of living creatures up to 5 miles away. She knows the general
direction they're in but not their exact locations.
Incorporeal Movement. The banshee can move through other
creatures and objects as if they wer§ difficult terrain, She takes
5 (ldlO) force damage if she ends her turn inside an object.
Actions_
Corrupting Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 12 (3d6 + 2) necrotic damage.
Horrifying Visage. Each non-undead creature within 60 feet of
the banshee that can see her must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A frightened target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
with disadvantage if the banshee is within line of sight, ending
the effect on itself on a success. If a target's saving throw is
successful or the effect ends for it, the target is immune to the
banshee's Horrifying Visage for the next 24 hours.
Wail (1/Day). The banshee releases a mournful wail, provided
that she isn't in sunlight. This wail has no effect on constructs
and undead. All other creatures within 30 feet of her that can
hear her must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. On
a failure, a creature drops to 0 hit points. On a success, a
creature takes 10 (3d6) psychic damage.
No ONE CARVES STATUES OF FRIGHTENED
WARRIORS. If YOU SEE ONE, KEEP YOUR EYES
CLOSED AND YOUR EARS OPEN.
Dungeon Survival
Basilisk
unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)       8(-l)       15 (+2)       2 (-4)       8 (-1)        7 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Petrifying Gaze. If a creature starts its turn within 30 feet of the
basilisk and the two of them can see each other, the basilisk
can force the creature to make a DC 12 Constitution saving
throw if the basilisk isn't incapacitated. On a failed save, the
creature magically begins to turn to stone and is restrained. It
must repeat the saving throw at the end of its next turn. On a
success, the effect ends. On a failure, the creature is petrified
until freed by the greater restoration spell or other magic.
A creature that isn't surprised can avert its eyes to avoid the
saving throw at the start of its turn. If it does so, it can't see
the basilisk until the start of its next turn, when it can avert its
eyes again. If it looks at the basilisk in the meantime, it must
immediately make the save.
If the basilisk sees its reflection within 30 feet of it in bright
light, it mistakes itself for a rival and targets itself with its gaze.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage.
Basilisk
Travelers sometimes find objects that look like pieces of
remarkably lifelike stone carvings of wildlife. Missing
parts appear to have been bitten off. Seasoned explorers
regard such relics as warnings, knowing that the
basilisk that created them is likely to be nearby.
Adaptable Predators. Basilisks thrive in arid,
temperate, or tropical climates. They lair in caves
or other sheltered sites. Most often, basilisks are
encountered underground.
A basilisk born and raised in captivity can be
domesticated and trained. Such a trained basilisk
knows how to avoid meeting the eyes of those its master
wishes to protect from its gaze, but it makes a daunting
guardian beast. Because of this use, basilisk eggs are
highly prized.
Gaze of Stone. Basilisks are ponderous for hunting
creatures, but they needn't chase prey. Meeting a
basilisk's supernatural gaze can be enough to affect a
rapid transformation, transforming a victim into porous
stone. Basilisks, with their strong jaws, are able to
consume the stone. The stone returns to organic form in
the basilisk's gullet.
Some alchemists are said to know how to process
the basilisk's gullet and the fluids contained within.
Properly handled, the gullet produces an oil that can
return petrified creatures to flesh and life. Unfortunately
for such a victim, any parts lost in stone form remain
absent if the creature revives. Revivification using the
oil is impossible if a vital part of the petrified creature,
such as its head, is detached.
U
BfoStLIS
,ISK
Armor Class 17, (natural armor)
Hit Points 168 (16d12 + 64)
Speed 50 ft., climb 40 ft.
ST
STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIS
CHA
I
I "23 (+6)      16 (+3)      18 (+4)       7 (-2)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)
i Skills Perception +6, Stealth +7
I Damage Immunities lightning
I Senses darkvision 90 ft., passive Perception 16
, Languages Draconic
\ Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The behir makes two attacks: one with its bite and
one to constrict.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3dl0 + 6) piercing damage.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
Large or smaller creature. Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) bludgeoning
j damage plus 17 (2dl0 + 6) slashing damage. The target is
,' grappled (escape DC 16) if the behir isn't already constricting a
I creature, and the target is restrained until this grapple ends.
, Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The behir exhales a line of
' lightning that is 20 feet long and 5 feet wide. Each creature
in that line must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw, taking
66 (12dl0) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much
i damage on a successful one.
1 Swallow. The behir makes one bite attack against a Medium or
, smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target is also
swallowed, and the grapple ends. While swallowed, the target
is blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks
and other effects outside the behir, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid
damage at the start of each of the behir's turns. A behir can
have only one creature swallowed at a time.
If the behir takes 30 damage or more on a single turn from
the swallowed creature, the behir must succeed on a DC 14
Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate
the creature, which falls prone in a space within 10 feet of
the behir. If the behir dies, a swallowed creature is no longer
J restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using 15 feet
4  of movement, exiting prone.

\i

Behir
The serpentine behir crawls along floors and clambers
up walls to reach its prey. Its lightning breath can
incinerate most creatures, even as more powerful foes
are constricted in its coils and eaten alive.
A behir's monstrous form resembles a combination
of centipede and crocodile. Its scaled hide ranges from
ultramarine to deep blue in color, fading to pale blue on
its underside.
Cavern Predators. Behirs lair in places inaccessible
to other creatures, favoring locations where would-be
intruders must make a harrowing climb to reach them.
Deep pits, high caves in cliff walls, and caverns reached
only by narrow, twisting tunnels are prime sites for a
behir ambush. A behir's dozen legs allow it to scramble
through its lair site with ease. When not climbing, it
moves even faster by folding its legs beside its body and
slithering like a snake.
Behirs swallow their prey whole, after which they
enter a period of dormancy while they digest. While
dormant, a behir chooses a hiding place where intruders
in its lair might overlook it.
Foes of the Dragons. In times long forgotten,
giants and dragons engaged in seemingly endless
war. Storm giants created the first behirs as weapons
against the dragons, and behirs retain a natural hatred
for dragonkind.
A behir never makes its lair in an area it knows to be
inhabited by a dragon. If a dragon attempts to establish,
a lair within a few dozen miles of a behir's lair, the behir;'',
is compelled to kill the dragon or drive it off. Only if the
dragon proves too powerful to fight does a behir back
down, seeking out a new lair site a great distance away.

35
One glance at a beholder is enough to assess its foul
and otherworldly nature. Aggressive, hateful, and
greedy, these aberrations dismiss all other creatures as
lesser beings, toying with them or destroying them as
they choose.
A beholder's spheroid body levitates at all times, and
its great bulging eye sits above a wide, toothy maw, while
the smaller eyestalks that crown its body twist and turn
to keep its foes in sight. When a beholder sleeps, it closes
its central eye but leaves its smaller eyes open and alert.
Xenophobic Isolationists. Enemies abound, or
so every beholder believes. Beholders are convinced
that other creatures resent them for their brilliance
and magical power, even as they dismiss those lesser
creatures as crude and disgusting. Beholders always
suspect others of plotting against them, even when no
other creatures are around.
The disdain a beholder has for other creatures
extends to other beholders. Each beholder believes its
form to be an ideal, and that any deviation from that
form is a flaw in the racial purity of its kind. Beholders
vary greatly in their physical forms, making conflict
between them inevitable. Some beholders are protected
by overlapping chitinous plates. Some have smooth
hides. Some have eyestalks that writhe like tentacles,
while others' stalks bear crustacean-like joints. Even
slight differences of coloration in hide can turn two
beholders into lifelong enemies.
Eye Tyrant. Some beholders manage to channel
their xenophobic tendencies into a terrible despotism.
Rather than live in isolation, the aptly named eye tyrants
enslave those other creatures, founding and controlling
vast empires. An eye tyrant sometimes carves out a
domain within or under a major city, commanding
networks of agents that operate on their master's behalf.
Alien Lairs. Because they refuse to share territory
with others, most beholders withdraw to frigid hills,
abandoned ruins, and deep caverns to scheme. A
beholder's lair is carved out by its disintegration eye ray,
emphasizing vertical passages connecting chambers
stacked on top of each other. Such an environment
allows a beholder to move freely, even as it prevents
intruders from easily creeping about. When intruders
do break in, the height of its open ceilings allows a
beholder to float up and harry foes on the floor.
As alien as their creator, the rooms in a beholder's lair
reflect the creature's arrogance. It festoons its chambers
with trophies from the battles it has won, including
petrified adventurers standing frozen in their horrified
final moments, pieces of other beholders, and magic
items wrested from powerful foes. A beholder judges
its own worth by its acquisitions, and it never willingly
parts with its treasures.
A Beholder's Lair
A beholder's central lair is typically a large, spacious
cavern with high ceilings, where it can attack without
fear of closing to melee range. A beholder encountered
in its lair has a challenge rating of 14 (11.500XP).
Lair Actions
When fighting inside its lair, a beholder can invoke the
.ambient magic to take lair actions. On initiative count
20 (losing initiative ties), the beholder can take one lair
action to cause one of the following effects:
A 50-foot square area of ground within 120 feet of the
beholder becomes slimy; that area is difficult terrain
until initiative count 20 on the next round.
Walls within 120 feet of the beholder sprout grasping
appendages until initiative count 20 on the round after
next. Each creature of the beholder's choice that starts
its turn within 10 feet of such a wall must succeed
on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or be grappled.
Escaping requires a successful DC 15 Strength
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check.
•  An eye opens on a solid surface within 60 feet of the
beholder. One random eye ray of the beholder shoots
from that eye at a target of the beholder's choice that it
can see. The eye then closes and disappears.
The beholder can't repeat an effect until they have
all been used, and it can't use the same effect two
rounds in a row.
Regional Effects
A region containing a beholder's lair is warped by the
creature's unnatural presence, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
Creatures within 1 mile of the beholder's lair some-
times feel as if they're being watched when they aren't.
When the beholder sleeps, minor warps in reality
occur within 1 mile of its lair and then vanish 24
hours later. Marks on cave walls might change subtly,
an eerie trinket might appear where none existed
before, harmless slime might coat a statue, and so
on. These effects apply only to natural surfaces and to
nonmagical objects that aren't on anyone's person.
If the beholder dies, these effects fade over the course
of ldlO days.
Death Tyrant
On rare occasions, a beholder's sleeping mind drifts to
places beyond its normal madness, imagining a reality
in which it exists beyond death. When such dreams take
hold, a beholder can transform, its flesh sloughing away
to leave a death tyrant behind. This monster possesses
the cunning and much of the magic it had in life, but it is
fueled by the power of undeath.
A death tyrant appears as a massive, naked skull, with
a pinpoint of red light gleaming in its hollow eye socket.
With its eyestalks rotted away, ten spectral eyes hover
above the creature and glare in all directions.
Deathly Despot. As they did when they were
beholders, death tyrants lord their power over other
creatures. Moreover, a beholder's ability to quash
magical energy with its central eye gives way to a more
sinister power in a death tyrant, which can transform
former slaves and enemies into undead servants.
Zombies created by a death tyrant are used and
discarded as needed. They stand guard at the entrances
to the death tyrant's lair or guard its treasure vaults.
Acting as bait for traps or as combat fodder, zombies
keep powerful enemies distracted while the death tyrant
moves into position and prepares to destroy th'ein.
Armies of the Dead. A death tyrant that embraces
undeath becomes an engine of destruction. Driven by
a hunger for power and security, it advances against
humanoid settlements, using its eye rays to destroy
every creature it encounters, then building an army of
undead. If left unchecked, a death tyrant mightwigje out
the population of a city in weeks, then set its undead eye
on wider conquest. As each settlement falls, the death
tyrant's zombie forces build to overwhelming numbers.
Undead Nature. A death tyrant doesn't require air,.
food, drink, or sleep.
A Death Tyrant's Lair
^•itf
A death tyrant's lair is usually the same site it held as
a beholder, but it contains more trappings of death
and decay. A death tyrant encountered in its lair has a
challenge rating of 15 (13,000 XP).
Lair Actions
When fighting inside its lair, a death tyrant can invoke
the ambient magic to take lair actions. On initiative
count 20 (losing initiative ties), the death tyrant can take
one lair action to cause one of the following effects:
•  An area that is a 50-foot cube within 120 feet of the
tyrant is filled with spectral eyes and tentacles. To
creatures other than the death tyrant, that area is
lightly obscured and difficult terrain until initiative
count 20 on the next round.
•  Walls sprout spectral appendages until initiative
count 20 on the round after next. Any creature, includ-
ing one on the Ethereal Plane, that is hostile to the
tyrant and starts its turn within 10 feet of a wall must
succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or be grap-
pled. Escaping requires a successful DC 17 Strength
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check.
A spectral eye opens in the air at a point within 50 feet
of the tyrant. One random eye ray of the tyrant shoots
from that eye, which is considered to be an ethereal
source, at a target of the tyrant's choice. The eye then
closes and disappears.
The death tyrant can't repeat an effect until all three
have been used, and it can't use the same effect on
consecutive rounds.
Regional Effects
A region containing a death tyrant's lair is warped by
the creature's unnatural presence, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
Creatures within 1 mile of the tyrant's lair sometimes
feel as if they're being watched even when they aren't.
When a creature hostile to the tyrant and aware of
its existence finishes a long rest within 1 mile of the
tyrant's lair, roll a d20 for that creature. On a roll of 10
or lower, the creature is subjected to one random eye
ray of the tyrant.
If the death tyrant dies, these effects fade over the
course of ldlO days.
r
%i
I Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
I Hit Points 180 (I9dl 0+76)
Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover)

'Every beholder thinks it is the epitome
of beholoeSiUnd, ano the only thing it
fears is that it might be wrong."
— Valkara IroNfell, Dwarf sage
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      14 (+2)      18 (+4)      17 (+3)     15 (+2)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Int +8, Wis +7, Cha +8
Skills Perception +12
* Condition Immunities prone
J Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
I Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon
I Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
} Antimagic Cone. The beholder's central eye creates an area of
I antimagic, as in the antimagic field spell, in a 150-foot cone. At
i the start of each of its turns, the beholder decides which way
' the cone faces and whether the cone is active. The area works
I against the beholder's own eye rays.
I Actions
I Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage.
Eye Rays. The beholder shoots three of the following magical
' eye rays at random (reroll duplicates), choosing one to three
I targets it can see within 120 feet of it:
1.  Charm Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
16 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the beholder for 1
I hour, or until the beholder harms the creature.
2. Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a
I DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute.
I The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
1 turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
3.  Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16
I Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target
I can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
4. Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a
DC 16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target's
speed is halved for 1 minute. In addition, the creature can't
take reactions, and it can take either an action or a bonus
action on its turn, not bofh. The creature can r$peat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
5.  Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 16
Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage oh
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
6.  Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed
on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or the beholder moves
it up to 30 feet in any direction. It is restrained by the ray's
telekinetic grip until the start of the beholder's next turn or
until the beholder is incapacitated.
If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or less that
isn't being worn or carried, it is moved up to 30 feet in any
direction. The beholder can also exert fine control on objects
with this ray, such as manipulating a simple tool or opening a
door or a container.
7. Sleep Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16
Wisdom saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious
for 1 minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another
creature takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on
constructs and undead.
8.  Petrification Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC
16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature begins
to turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving
throw at the end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends.
On a failure, the creature is petrified until freed by the greater
restoration spell or other magic.
9.  Disintegration Ray. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8)
force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit
points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust.
If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or
creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving
throw. If the target is a Huge or larger object or creation of
magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot cube of it.
10.  Death Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
16 Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (lOdlO) necrotic damage.
The target dies if the ray reduces it to 0 hit points.
Legendary Actions
The beholder can take 3 legendary actions, using the Eye Ray
option below. It can take only one legendary action at a time
and only at the end of another creature's turn. The beholder
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Eye Ray. The beholder uses one random eye ray.
s^a^
"^,"-
MUM   hiBTl
38
1.1: HOLDERS
Death TVrant
Large undead, lawful evil

„j THE CEILING-
ICE IN THE
PESCENOEO
FROM
'A CLOS-TEB Of              -,.„ ,NG.T«ESE
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 187 (25dl0+50)
Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)      19 (+4)     15 (+2)      19 (+4)
Saving Throws Str +5, Con +7, Int +9, Wis +7, Cha +9
Skills Perception+12
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP)
Negative Energy Cone. The death tyrant's central eye emits an
invisible, magical 150-foot cone of negative energy. At the start
of each of its turns, the tyrant decides which way the cone faces
and whether the cone is active.
Any creature in that area can't regain hit points. Any
humanoid that dies there becomes a zombie under the tyrant's
command. The dead humanoid retains its place in the initiative
order and animates at the start of its next turn, provided that
its body hasn't been completely destroyed.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage.
Eye Rays. The death tyrant shoots three of the following
magical eye rays at random (reroll duplicates), choosing one to
three targets it can see within 120 feet of it:
7. Charm Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
17 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the tyrant for 1
hour, or until the beholder harms the creature.
2.  Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a
DC 17 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute.
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
3.  Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 17
Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
4. Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a
ass:-!-
TWAT
""explorer OF
otes
ALIEN SX"*-1-

Legendary Actions
DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed'save, the target's
speed is halved for 1 minute. In addition, the creature can't
take reactions, and it can take either an action or a bonus
action on its turn, not both. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
5.  Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 17
Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
6. Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed
on a DC 17 Strength saving throw or the tyrant moves it up to
30 feet in any direction. The target is restrained by the ray's
telekinetic grip until the start of the tyrant's next turn or until
the tyrant is incapacitated.
If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or less that
isn't being worn or carried, it is moved up to 30 feet in any
direction. The tyrant can also exert fine control on objects with
this ray, such as manipulating a simple tool or opening a door
or a container.
7.  Sleep Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 17
Wisdom saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious
for 1 minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another
creature takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on
constructs and undead.
8.  Petrification Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC
17 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature begins
to turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving
throw at the end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends.
On a failure, the creature is petrified until freed by the greater
restoration spell or other magic.
9.  Disintegration Ray. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8)
force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit
points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust.
If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or
creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving
throw. If the target is a Huge or larger object or creation of
magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot cube of it.
70. Death Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
17 Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (lOdlO) necrotic damage.
The target dies if the ray reduces it to 0 hit points.
:
:=
-■..J-IWm-'-XI^'.-    '      -     ■■■ aaMtMlf ^A»l!M>'.M
The death tyrant can take 3 legendary actions, using the Eye
Ray option below. It can take only one legendary action at a
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The tyrant
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Eye Ray. The death tyrant uses one random eye ray.

ass
BEHQLUEl
29
jJ*4.
Spectator
A spectator is a lesser beholder that is summoned
from another plane of existence by a magical ritual, the
components of which include four beholder eyestalks
that are consumed by the ritual's magic. Appropriately,
a spectator has four eyestalks, two on each side of the
wide eye at the center of its four-foot diameter body.
Magical Guardians. A summoned spectator guards
a location or a treasure of its summoner's choice
for 101 years, allowing no creature but its
summoner to enter the area or access the item,
unless the summoner instructed otherwise. If
the item is stolen or destroyed before the years
have all passed, a summoned spectator vanishes.
It otherwise never abandons its post.
Glimmers of Madness. Though it can speak, a
spectator communicates primarily by way of telepathy. It
is civil while on guard, openly discussing its orders and
its summoner. However, even a brief conversation with
a spectator is enough to reveal quirks in its personality
brought on by its years of isolation. It might invent
imaginary enemies, refer to itself in the third person, or
try to adopt the voice of its summoner.
Like any beholder, a spectator views itself as the
epitome of its kind, and it has an intense hatred of other
spectators. If two spectators encounter one another,
they almost always fight to the death.
Freed from Service. When a spectator has fulfilled
its service, it is free to do as it pleases. Many take
up residence in the places they previously guarded,
especially if their summoners have died. With the
spectator's loss of purpose, the flickers of madness it
displayed during its servitude flourish.
■"•riih. »8.ft
■-           :
^■-■m-jst,.^--';^.                ^.umiM-
-  -       -       -   ■------
■JMJA^bA.
! Spectator
■ Medium aberration, lawful neutral
\ Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
] Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
! Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIS
CHA
8 (-1)       14 (+2)      14 (+2)       13 (+1)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)
I Skills Perception +6
; Condition Immunities prone
1 Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
1 Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 120 ft.
\ Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 2 (ld6 - 1) piercing damage.
Eye Rays. The spectator shoots up to two of the following
magical eye rays at one or two creatures it can see within 90
feet of it. It can use each ray only once on a turn.
7. Confusion Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13
Wisdom saving throw, or it can't take reactions until the end
of its next turn. On its turn, the target can't move, and it uses
its action to make a melee or ranged attack'against a randomly
determined creature within range. If the target can't attack, it
does nothing on its turn.
2.  Paralyzing Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13
Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
3.  Fear Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, with
disadvantage if the spectator is visible to the target, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
4.  Wounding Ray. The target must make a DC 13 Constitution
saving throw, taking 16 (3dl0) necrotic damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Create Food and Water. The spectator magically creates
enough food and water to sustain itself for 24 hours.
Reactions____________________________
Spell Reflection. If the spectator makes a successful saving
throw against a spell, or a spell attack misses it, the spectator
can choose another creature (including the spellcaster) it can
see within 30 feet of it. The spell targets the chosen creature
instead of the spectator. If the spell forced a saving throw, the
chosen creature makes its own save. If the spell was an attack,
the attack roll is rerolled against the chosen creature.
■■■v-^. ■—■-
zzz
— -
i-row. ■■>.
■^a1-     - A-WLiia
3°

* ,
Blights
Awakened plants gifted with the powers of
intelligence and mobility, blights plague
lands contaminated by darkness. Drinking
that darkness from the soil, a blight carries
out the will of ancient evil and attempts to
spread that evil wherever it can.
Roots of the Gulthias Tree. Legends
tell of a vampire named Gulthias who
worked terrible magic and raised up
an abominable tower called Nightfang
Spire. Gulthias was undone when a
hero plunged a wooden stake through
his heart, but as the vampire was
destroyed, his blood infused the stake
with a dreadful power. In time, tendrils
of new growth sprouted from the wood,
growing into a sapling infused with the
vampire's evil essence. It is said that
a mad druid discovered the sapling,
transplanting it to an underground grotto
where it could grow. From this Gulthias
tree came the seeds from which the first
blights were sown.
Dark Conquest. Wherever a tree or plant
is contaminated by a fragment of an evil mind
or power, a Gulthias tree can rise to infest and
corrupt the surrounding forest. Its evil spreads
through root and soil to other plants, which perish
or transform into blights. As those blights spread,
they poison and uproot healthy plants, replacing them
with brambles, toxic weeds, and others of their kind.
In time, an infestation of blights can turn any land or
forest into a place of corruption.
In forests infested with blights, trees and
plants grow with supernatural speed. Vines and
undergrowth rapidly spread through buildings and
overrun trails and roads. After blights have killed
or driven off their inhabitants, whole villages can
disappear in the space of days.
Controlled by Evil. Blights are independent
creatures, but most act under a Gulthias tree's control,
often displaying the habits and traits of the life force or
spirit that spawned them. By attacking their progenitor's
old foes or seeking out treasures valuable to it, they
carry on the legacy of long-lost evil.
Needle Blight________________ ,.
In the shadows of a forest, needle blights might
be taken at a distance for shuffling, hunched
humanoids. Up close, these creatures reveal
themselves as horrid plants whose conifer-like
needles grow across their bodies in quivering
clumps. A needle blight lashes out with these
needles or launches them as an aerial assault that
can punch through armor and flesh.
When needle blights detect a threat, they loose a
pollen that the wind carries to other needle blights
throughout the forest. Alerted to their foes' location,
needle blights converge from all sides to drench their
roots in blood.
Behold the legacy of
gulthias the vampire; plants
with a taste for blood.
Twig Blight
Twig blights can root in soil, which they do when living
prey are scarce. While rooted, they resemble woody
shrubs. When it pulls its roots free of the ground to
move, a twig blight's branches twist together to form a
humanoid-looking body with a head and limbs.
Twig blights seek out campsites and watering holes,
rooting there to set up ambushes for potential victims
coming to drink or rest. Huddled together in groups,
twig blights blend in with an area's natural vegetation or
with piles of debris or firewood.
Given how dry they are, twig blights are particularly
susceptible to fire.
Vine Blight
Appearing as masses of slithering creepers, vine blights
hide in undergrowth and wait for prey to draw near. By
animating the plants around them, vine blights entangle
and hinder their foes before attacking.
Vine blights are the only blights capable of speech.
Through its connection to the evil spirit of the Gulthias
-tree it serves, a vine blight speaks in a fractured version
of its dead master's voice, taunting victims or bargaining
with powerful foes.
.._'' t-'-i11 l ,■_
-■■j^..^-
.,'-  •■        •"':   a
Needle Blight
Medium plant, neutral evil
Armor Class M (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 ,(2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)       4 (-3)       8(-l)        3 (-4)
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 9
Languages understands Common but can't speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) piercing damage.
I Needles. Ranged Weapon Attack:+3 to hit, range 30/60 ft., one
I target. Hit: 8 (2d6 + 1) piercing damage.
-'-'   .■-.■■■'--                 -          T
Twig Plight
■Small plant, neutral evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 4 (ld6+l)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
-6 (-2)       13 (+1)      12 (+1)       4 (-3)       8(-l)        3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +3
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 9
Languages understands Common but can't speak
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a dead shrub.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage.
Vine Blight
Medium plant, neutral evil
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 26 (4d8 + 8)
Speed 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)       8(-l)       14 (+2)       5 (-3)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +1
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 10
Languages Common
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a tangle of vines.
Actions
( Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
I target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and a Large or
j smaller target is grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple
I ends, the target is restrained, and the blight can't constrict
| another target.
Entangling Plants (Recharge 5-6). Grasping roots and vines
| sprout in a 15-foot radius centered on the blight, withering
I away after 1 minute. For the duration, that area is difficult
terrain for nonplant creatures. In addition, each creature
of the blight's choice in that area when the plants appear
J must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw or become
I restrained. A creature can use its action to make a DC 12
4 Strength check, freeing itself or another entangled creature
J within reach on a success.
3?
l^ilG'JiTS
BtfGBEARS
Bugbears are born for battle and mayhem. Surviving
by raiding and hunting, they bully the weak and despise
being bossed around, but their love of carnage means
they will fight for powerful masters if bloodshed and
treasure are assured.
Goblinoids. Bugbears are often found in the company
of their cousins, hobgoblins and goblins. Bugbears
usually enslave goblins they encounter, and they bully
hobgoblins into giving them gold and food in return
for serving as scouts and shock troops. Even when
paid, bugbears are at best unreliable allies, yet goblins
and hobgoblins understand that no matter how much
bugbears might drain a tribe of resources, these
creatures are a potent force.
Followers of Hruggek. Bugbears worship Hruggek,
a lesser god who dwells on the plane of Acheron. In the
absence of their goblinoid kin, bugbears form loose war
bands, each one led by its fiercest member. Bugbears
believe that when they die, their spirits have a chance
to fight at Hruggek's side. They try to prove themselves
worthy by defeating as many foes as possible.
Venal Ambushers. Despite their intimidating builds,
bugbears move with surprising stealth. They are fond of
setting ambushes and flee when outmatched. They are
dependable mercenaries as long as they are supplied
food, drink, and treasure, but a bugbear forgets any
bond when its life is on the line. A wounded member of
a bugbear band might be left behind to help the rest of
the band escape, Afterward, that bugbear might help
pursuers track down its former companions if doing so
saves its life.
'   ~
■^'-,"--L   '■••'    "•               .-JahBH
Bugbear
Medium humanoid (gohlinoid)t chaotic evil
M—^—■—^———
Armor Class 16. (hide armor, shield)
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5)
Speed 30 ft.

STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      13 (+1)       8 (-1)      11 (+0)      9 (-1)
Skills Stealth +6, Survival +2
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
i
Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its damage when the
bugbear hits with it (included in the attack).
Surprise Attack. If the bugbear surprises a creature and hits it
with an attack during the first round of combat, the target takes
| an extra 7 (2d6) damage from the attack.
Actions
Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
' target. Hit: 11 (2d8 + 2) piercing damage.
I Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage
in melee or 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage at range.
C ■"■.r.Jvrir'TiSTii^ri-Jiifl^
Bugbear Chief
Medium humanoid (goblinoid), chaotic evil
Armor Class 17 (chain shirt, shield)
Hit Points 65 (I0d8 +20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
';17 (+3)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)     12 (+1)      11 (+0)
Skills Intimidation +2, Stealth +6, Survival +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common, Goblin
1 Challenge 3 (700 XP)
I
Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its damage when the
bugbear hits with it (included in the attack).
Heart of Hruggek. The bugbear has advantage on saving
throws against being charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
poisoned, stunned, or put to sleep.
Surprise Attack. If the bugbear surprises a creature and hits it
with an attack during the first round of combat, the target takes
an extra 7 (2d6) damage from the attack.
Actions
Multiattack. The bugbear makes two melee attacks.
Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage
in melee or 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage at range.

,u~UI*A
1 J-^'-.         ----
HtTCBl
33
Bulette
A bulette is a massive
predator that terrorizes
any lands it inhabits. Also
called a "land shark," it
lives only to feed. Irascible
and rapacious, bulettes
fear no other creature, and
they attack with no regard
for superior numbers
or strength.
Underground Hunters.
Bulettes use their powerful
claws to tunnel through the
earth when they hunt. Heedless
of obstruction, they uproot trees, cause
landslides in loose slopes, and leave sinkholes
behind them. When vibrations in the soil and rock alert
a bulette to movement, it shoots to the surface, its jaws
^spread wide as it attacks.
Wandering Monster. A bulette ranges across
temperate lands, feeding on any animals and
fiijmanoids it comes across. These creatures dislike
dwarf and elf flesh, although they often kill them before
realizing what they are. A bulette loves halfling meat the
^rnost, and it is never happier than when chasing plump
halflings across an open field.
A bulette has no lair, but roams a hunting territory
up to thirty miles wide. Its sole criterion for territory is
availability of food, and when it has eaten everything
in an area, a bulette moves on. These creatures often
home in on humanoid settlements, terrorizing them
until their panicked residents have fled, or until the
bulette is slain.
All creatures shun bulettes, which treat anything
that moves as food—even other predators and bulettes.
Bulettes come together only to mate, resulting in a
bloody act of claws and teeth that usually ends with the
male's death and consumption.
Arcane Creation. Some sages believe the bulette
is the result of a mad wizard's experiments at
crossbreeding snapping turtles and armadillos, with
infusions of demon ichor. Bulettes have been thought
to be extinct at different times, but after years without
a sighting, the creatures inevitably reappear. Because
theiryoung are almost never seen, some sages suspect
that bulettes maintain secret nesting grounds from
which adults strike out into the world.
Bulette
Large monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 94 (9dl0 + 45)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      11 (+0)      21 (+5)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Skills Perception +6
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
(passive Perception 16
Languages —
Challenges (1,800XP)
Standing Leap. The bulette's long jump is up to 30 feet and its
high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start.

Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 30 (4dl2 + 4) piercing damage.
Deadly Leap. If the bulette jumps at least 15 feet as part of
its movement, it can then use this action to land on its feet
in a space that contains one or more other creatures. Each of
those creatures must succeed on a DC 16 Strength or Dexterity
saving throw (target's choice) or be knocked prone and take
14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (3d6 + 4) slashing
I damage. On a successful save, the creature takes only half
the damage, isn't knocked prone, and is pushed 5 feet out of
the bulette's space into an unoccupied space of the creature's
J choice. If no unoccupied space is within range, the creature
instead falls prone in the bulette's space.

34
m:i F.rrr

BtfLLYWUG
Life as a bullywug is nasty, brutish, and wet. These frog-
headed amphibious humanoids must stay constantly
moist, dwelling in rainy forests, marshes, and damp
caves. Always hungry and thoroughly evil, bullywugs
overwhelm opponents with superior numbers when
they can, but they flee from serious threats to search for
easier prey.
Bullywugs have green, gray, or mottled yellow skin
that shifts through shades of gray, green, and brown,
allowing them to blend in with their surroundings. They
wear crude armor and wield simple weapons, and can
deliver a powerful bite to foes that press too close.
Foul Aristocracy. Bullywugs consider themselves
the right and proper rulers of the swamps. They follow
an.etiquette of sorts when dealing with outsiders and
each other, subject to the whims and fancies of their
leader—a self-styled lord of the muck. Bullywugs introduce
themselves with grand-sounding titles, make great shows
of bowing and debasing themselves before their superiors,
and endlessly vie to win their superiors' favor.
A bullywug has two ways to advance among its kind.
It can either murder its rivals, though it must take
pains to keep its criminal deeds secret, or it can find
a treasure or magic item and present it as tribute or a
token of obeisance to its liege. A bullywug that murders
its rivals without cunning is likely to be executed, so
it's more common for bullywugs to stage raids against
caravans and settlements, with the goal of securing
precious baubles to impress their lords and win their
good graces. Invariably, such fine goods'are reduced
to filthy tatters through abuse and neglect. Once a gift
loses its sheen, a bullywug lord invariably demands that
its subjects bring it more treasure as tribute.
Unruly Diplomacy. Bullywugs love nothing more than
lording over those who trespass on their territories.
Their warriors attempt to capture intruders rather than
simply slaying them.
Captives are dragged before the king or queen—a
bullywug of unusually large size—and forced to beg
for mercy. Bribes, treasure, and flattery can trick the
bullywug ruler into letting its captives go, but not before
it tries to impress its "guests" with the majesty of its
treasure and its realm. Struck with a deep inferiority
complex, bullywug lords fancy themselves as kings
and queens, but desperately crave the fear and respect
of outsiders.
Amphibian Allies. Bullywugs speak a language
that allows them to communicate over large areas by
croaking like frogs. News of intruders or other events
in the swamp spread within minutes across this crude
communication system.
Simple concepts in the language are understandable
to frogs and toads. Bullywugs use this capability to
form strong bonds with giant frogs, which they train
as guardians and hunters. Larger specimens are
sometimes used as mounts as well. The frogs' ability
to swallow creatures whole provides a bullywug
hunting band an easy means of carrying prey back to
their villages.
Bullywug
Medium humanoid (bullywug), neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (hide armor, shield)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
12 (+1)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)
INT          WIS
7 (-2)      10 (+0)
CHA
7 (-2)
Skills Stealth +3
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages Bullywug
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Amphibious. The bullywug can breathe air and water.
Speak with Frogs and Toads. The bullywug can communicate
simple concepts to frogs and toads when it speaks in Bullywug.
Swamp Camouflage. The bullywug has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in swampy terrain.
Standing Leap. The bullywug's long jump is up to 20 feet and
its high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start.
Actions
Multiattack. The bullywug makes two melee attacks: one with
its bite and one with its spear.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage, or
5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
F.UI "
35

PI"""   M •"'•JW!'
Cambion
Medium fiend, any evil alignment
Armor Class 19 (scale mail)
Hit Points 82 (lld8 +33)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
18 (+4)      18 (+4)     16 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)
Saving Throws Str +7, Con +6, Int +5, Cha +6
Skills Deception +6, Intimidation +6, Perception +4, Stealth +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning, poison; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Fiendish Blessing. The AC of the cambion includes its
Charisma bonus.
Innate Spellcasting. The cambion's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The cambion can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:

Thev CRAWL from THEIR MOTHERS'
WOMBS TO SPREAD CORRUPTION
THROUGHOUT THE MULTIVERSE.
What's not to love?"
-Baba Yaga
Cambion
A cambion is the offspring of a fiend (usually a succubus
or incubus) and a humanoid (usually a human).
Cambions inherit aspects of both parents, but their
horns, leathery wings, and sinewy tails are hallmarks of
their otherworldly parentage.
Born to Be Bad. Cambions grow into ruthless adults
whose wickedness and perversion horrifies even the
most devoted mortal parent. Even as a youth, a cambion
identifies its rightful place as an overlord of mortals. It
might orchestrate uprisings in towns and cities, gathering
gangs of humanoids and lesser devils to serve it.
Pawns of the Mighty. A cambion forced to serve its
fiendish parent does so out of admiration and dread, but
also with the expectation that it will one day rise to a
place of prominence. Cambions raised in the Nine Hells
serve as soldiers, envoys, and personal attendants to
greater devils. In the Abyss, a cambion carries only as
much authority as it can muster through sheer strength
and force of will.
k Spawn ofGraz'zt. The demon lord Graz'zt is fond of
rocreating with humanoids who have made pacts with
^fiends, and he has sired many cambions who help him
sow chaos across the multiverse. These cambions are
characterized by charcoal-black skin, cloven hooves, six-
fingered hands, and unearthly beauty.
3/day each: alter self, corr\mand, detect magic
1/day: plane shift (self only)
Acti6ns-       '    ■ ,"-• /yV' .   "••'/*'•":./>'..
Multiattack. The cambion makes two melee attacks or uses its
Fire Ray twice.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage, or |
8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack, plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Fire Roy. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage.
Fiendish Charm. One humanoid the cambion can see within
30 feet of it must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or
be magically charmed for 1 day. The charmed target obeys the
cambion's spoken commands. If the target suffers any harm
from the cambion or another creature or receives a suicidal
command from the cambion, the target can repeat the saving
throw, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a target's
saving throw is successful, or if the effect ends for it, the
creature is immune to the cambion's Fiendish Charm for the
next 24 hours.
3.6
UAMBION


Carrion Crawler
Carrion-jCrawlers scour putrid flesh from carcasses and
gobble the slimy bones that remain. They aggressively
attack any creature that trespasses on their territory or
disturbs their feasting.
Carrion Eaters. A carrion crawler follows the
scent of death to its food, but it prefers not to compete
with other scavengers. These foul creatures thus
hunker down in territories where death is plentiful
and other carrion eaters have limited mobility. Caves,
sewers, dungeons, and forested marshes are their
favored lairs, but carrion crawlers are also drawn to
battlefields and cemeteries.
A carrion crawler roams on the hunt, its tentacles
probing the air for the scent of blood or decay. In tunnels
or ruins, carrion crawlers scurry across the ceiling as
they move toward food. In this way, they avoid contact
with oozes, otyughs, and other dangerous inhabitants
of the darkness, even as they surprise potential meals
that don't think to look up.
Patient Predators. Whether in subterranean
darkness or while hunting at night, light signals a
potential meal. A carrion crawler might follow a light
source from a distance for hours, hoping to pick up the
scent of blood. Despite their great size, carrion crawlers
can also easily set up ambushes by waiting around blind
corners for prey to come to them.
When facing potential prey or intruders, a carrion
crawler lets its poison do the work. Once a victim goes
rigid with paralysis, the carrion crawler wraps it with
its tentacles and drags it away to a high ledge or isolated
passageway, where it can be killed safely. The monster
then resumes patrolling its territory while waiting for its
meal to ripen;
Large monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 13. (natural armor)
Hit Points 51 (6d10+18)
Spwed 30 ft, climb 30 ft.

STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      13 (+1)      16 (+3)       1 (-5)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Skills Perception +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Keen Smell. The carrion crawler has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Spicier Climb. The carrion crawler can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Multiattack. The carrion crawler makes two attacks: one with
its tentacles and one with its bite.
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) poison damage, and the target must
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned
for 1 minute. Until this poison ends, the target is paralyzed.
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the poison on itself on a success.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage.
■
37
^  *
-B-LEYS::r;;:E;;-hooves 0FFURv,
iylRV.L«S«AV.ORMOrSUHOO«N
38
GEN.TAXTR
'targe monstrosity, neutral good
=3
{ Armor Class 12
I Hit Points 45 (6dl0+ 12)
Speed 50 ft.
,  STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)       9 (-1)       13 (+1)      11 (+0)
Skills Athletics +6, Perception +3, Survival +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the centaur moves at least 30 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a pike attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 10 (3d6) piercing damage.
Actions
Multiattack. The centaur makes two attacks: one with its pike
and one with its hooves or two with its longbow.
Pike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ldlO + 4) piercing damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target,
j Hit: 11 (2d6 +4) bludgeoning damage.
I Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
—
•   ■     ■-       '        1

Centaur
Reclusive wanderers and omen-readers of the wild,
centaurs avoid conflict but fight fiercely when pressed.-
They roam the vast wilderness, keeping far from
borders, laws, and the company of other creatures.
Wilderness Nomads. Centaur tribes range across
lands with mild to hot climates, where a centaur
requires only light furs or oiled skins to deal with
inclement weather. They are hunter-gatherers and rarely
build shelters or even use tents.
Centaur migrations span continents and take decades
to repeat, so that a centaur tribe might not retread
the same path for generations. These long-ranging
patterns can lead to conflict when centaurs encounter
settlements of other creatures built along their
traditional routes.
Reluctant Settlers. A centaur that can't keep pace
with the rest of its tribe is left behind. Some such
centaurs vanish into the wilderness and are never
seen again. Those that can bear the loss of their tribe
might take up residence among other races. Frontier
settlements value the nature knowledge of their centaur
residents. Many such communities owe their survival to
the insight and acumen of a centaur.
Despite their reclusive nature, centaurs trade with
elves and with the caravans of other benevolent
humanoids they meet during their wanderings. A trader
might save the life of a wounded or an elderly centaur
unfit for long travel, escorting it to a settlement where it
can peacefully live out the rest of its days.




V
*^
r"l
\'
Chimera
Large monstrosity, chaofidevil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 114 (12dl0 + 48)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      11 (+0)      19 (+4)       3 (-4)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)
Skills Perception +8
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages understands Draconic but can't speak
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Actions
i Mulliattack. The chimera makes three attacks: one with its
bite, one with its horns, and one with its claws. When its
■ fire breath is available, it can use the breath in place of its
I bite or horns.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
1 H/t; 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Horns. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
9 Hit: 10 (ldl2 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon head exhales fire in a
I 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15
4 Dexterity saving throw, taking 31 (7d8) fire damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Chimera
Chimeras were created after mortals summoned
Demogorgon to the world. The Prince of Demons,
unimpressed with the creatures that surrounded
it, transformed them into horrific, multi-headed
monstrosities. This act gave rise to the first chimeras.
Gifted with demonic cruelty, a chimera serves as* a
grim reminder of what happens when demon princes"1
find their way to the Material Plane. A typical specimen
has the hindquarters of a large goat, the forequarters of
a lion, and the leathery wings of a dragon, along with the
heads of all three of those creatures. The monster likes
to surprise its victims, swooping down from the sky and
engulfing prey with its fiery breath before landing.
Conflicted Creature. A chimera combines the worst
aspects of its three parts. Its dragon head drives it to
raid, plunder, and accumulate a great hoard. Its leonine
nature compels it to hunt and kill powerful creatures
that threaten its territory. Its goat head grants it a vicious,
stubborn streak that compels it to fight to the death.
These three aspects drive a chimera to stake out a
territory that is as large as 10 miles wide. It preys on
wild game, viewing more powerful creatures as rivals
to be humiliated and defeated. Its greatest rivals are
dragons, griffons, manticores, perytons, and wyverns.
When it hunts, the chimera looks for easy ways to
amuse itself. It enjoys the fear and suffering of weaker
creatures. The monster often toys with its prey, breaking
off an attack prematurely and leaving a creature
wounded and terrified before returning to finish it off.
Servant of Evil. Though chimeras are far from
cunning, their draconic ego makes them susceptible to
flattery and gifts. If offered food and treasure, a chimera
might spare a traveler. A villain can lure a chime.ra into
service by keeping it well fed and its treasure hoard
well stocked.
■      '39;
Chuul
^m>
Survivors of the ancient aboleth empire, chuuls are
crustaceans the aboleths modified and endowed with
sentience. They follow the ingrained directives of their
creators, as they have done since the dawn of time.
Primeval Relics. In the primeval ages, aboleths ruled
a vast empire that spanned the oceans of the world. In
those days, the aboleths used mighty magic and bent
the minds of the nascent creatures of the mortal realm.
However, they were bound to the water and could not
enforce their will beyond it without servants. Therefore,
they created chuuls.
Perfectly obedient, the chuuls collected sentient
creatures and magic at the aboleths' command. Chuuls
were designed to endure the ages of the world, growing
in size and strength as the eons passed. When the
aboleths' empire crumbled with the rise of the gods,
the chuuls were cast adrift. However, these creatures
continue to do what they did for the aboleths, slowly
collecting humanoids, gathering treasure, amassing
magic, and consolidating power.
Tireless Guardians. Chuul still guard the ruins of the
ancient aboleth empire. They linger in silent observance
of eons-old commands. Rumors and ancient maps
sometimes lure treasure seekers to these ruins, but the
reward for their boldness is death.
Chuul
Large 'aberMon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
HitPpints93(lldlO + 33)
Speed 30 ft, swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
19 (+4)      10 (+0)      16 (+3)
F Skills Perception +4
I Damage Immunities poison
I Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
I Languages understands Deep Speech but can't speak
I Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
I Amphibious. The chuul can breathe air and water.
Sense Magic. The chuul senses magic within 120 feet of it at
will. This trait otherwise works like the detect magic spell but
isn't itself magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The chuul makes two pincer attacks. If the
chuul is grappling a creature, the chuul can also use its
tentacles once.
Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. The target is grappled
(escape DC 14) if it is a Large or smaller creature and the chuul
doesn't have two other creatures grappled.
Tentacles. One creature grappled by the chuul must succeed on
a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 minute.
Until this poison ends, the target is paralyzed. The target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success.
Whatever riches that the explorers bring with them
adds to the hoard guarded by the chuuls. Chuuls can
sense magic at a distance. This sense couples with
an innate drive that leads them to slay explorers,
take their gear, and bury it in secret locales aboleths
dictated eons ago.
Waiting Servants. Although the aboleths' ancient
empire fell long ago, the psychic bonds between them
and their created servants remain intact. Chuuls that
come into contact with aboleths immediately assume
their old roles. Such chuuls redirect their compulsions
to the service of the aboleths' sinister purposes.
4.0



Cloaker
Large aberration, chaotic neutral
—■—w*
Armor Class 14 ^natural armor)
Hit Points 78 (12dl0 +12)
Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft.
S*STH
17 (+3)
DEX
15 (+2)
CON
12 (+1)
INT
13 (+1)
WIS
12 (+1)

I
Skills Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Damage Transfer. While attached to a creature, the cloaker
takes only half the damage dealt to it (rounded down), and that  g^
creature takes the other half.
False Appearance. While the cloaker remains motionless
without its underside exposed, it is indistinguishable from a
dark leather cloak.
Light Sensitivity. While in bright light, the cloaker has
disadvantage on attack rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The cloaker makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its tail.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage, and if the target is Large or
smaller, the cloaker attaches to it. If the cloaker has advantage
against the target, the cloaker attaches to the target's head,
and the target is blinded and unable to breathe while the
cloaker is attached. While attached, the cloaker can make this
attack only against the target and has advantage on the attack
roll. The cloaker can detach itself by spending 5 feet of its
movement. A creature, including the target, can take its action
to detach the cloaker by succeeding on a DC 16 Strength check.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.
Hh: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage.
Moan. Each creature within 60 feet of the cloaker that can
hear its moan and that isn't an aberration must succeed on a
DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened until the
end of the cloaker's next turn. If a creature's saving throw is
successful, the creature is immune to the cloaker's moan for
the next 24 hours
Phantasms (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The cloaker
magically creates three illusory duplicates of itself if it isn't in
bright light. The duplicates move with it and mimic its actions,
shifting position so as to make it impossible to track which
cloaker is the real one. If the cloaker is ever in an area of bright
light, the duplicates disappear.
Whenever any creature targets the cloaker with an attack or
a harmful spell while a duplicate remains, that creature rolls
randomly to determine whether it targets the cloaker or one of
the duplicates. A creature is unaffected by this magical effect if
it can't see or if it relies on senses other than sight.
A duplicate has the cloaker's AC and uses its saving throws.
If an attack hits a duplicate, or if a duplicate fails a saving throw
against an effect that deals damage, the duplicate disappears.
Cloaker
Cloakers earned their names for the resemblance
they bear to dark leathery cloaks. Lurking in remote
dungeons and caves, these stealthy predators wait
to slay lone or injured prey stumbling through
the darkness.
Camouflaged Lurkers. Like a stingray, a cloaker's
body is composed of cartilage and muscle. With its tail
and fins unfurled, it flies through darkness and lurks
among the shadows of caverns the same way a stingray
glides through water and hides on the ocean floor.
Parallel rows of round, black eyespots run along its back
like buttons, and the ivory-colored claws on its cowl
resemble bone clasps.
When a cloaker unfurls and moves to attack, it reveals
its pale underside and makes its true nature evident.
Red eyes glow above rows of sharp teeth, and a long
pendulous tail whips behind it.
Opportunistic Predators. When hunting, cloakers
glide through the shadows at a safe distance behind
groups of other creatures traversing the Underdark.
They follow parties of humanoids to prey on the
wounded after a battle, or pursue herds of Underdark
beasts, attacking the sick, the weak, or the straggling.
Cloakers strike quickly and consume their meals
as swiftly as possible, enveloping and devouring
their victims. While it feeds, a cloaker uses its swift,
whiplike tail for defense, although it rarely takes a stand
against dangerous foes or groups of creatures. As an
added defense, cloakers can create illusory duplicates
of themselves.
Haunting Moan. Cloakers' thoughts are alien to other
life-forms, and they communicate with one another
through subsonic moans inaudible to most creatures. At
higher intensities, a cloaker's haunting moan becomes
audible, evoking sensations of doom and dread in
creatures that hear it.
Cloaker Conclaves. Cloakers prefer isolation, but
they sometimes convene with other cloakers for defense
or to exchange information about new dangers, suitable
hunting grounds, or developments that might affect   •
their habitats. When this convergence is complete, the
cloakers separate again.
1    ', KLli
41

GOGKATRICE
$m$ll monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 27 (6d6 + 6)
Speed 20 ft, fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
6 (-2)       12 (+1)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      13 (+1)      5 (-3)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Cockatrice
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage, and the target must succeed
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw against being magically
petrified. On a failed save, the creature begins to turn to stone
and is restrained. It must repeat the saving throw at the end of
its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On a failure, the
creature is petrified for 24 hours.
The cockatrice looks like a hideous hybrid of lizard,
bird, and bat, and it is infamous for its ability to turn
flesh to stone. These omnivores have a diet that consists
of berries, nuts, flowers, and small animals such as
insects, mice, and frogs—things they can swallow
whole. They would be no threat to anything else if not
for their fierce and frenzied response to even a hint of
danger. A cockatrice flies into the face of any threat,
squawking and madly beating its wings as its head darts
out to peck. The smallest scratch from a cockatrice's
beak can spell doom as its victim slowly turns to stone
from the injury.
42
Q0Ct$ATRICE
Couatl
Medium celestial, lawful good
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 97 (13d8+39)
, Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      20 (+5)     17 (+3)      18 (+4)     20 (+5)     18 (+4)
Saving Throws Con +5, Wis +7, Cha +6
\ Damage Resistances radiant
I Damage Immunities psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
; Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 15
e Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The couatl's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring only verbal components:
At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, detect thoughts
3/day each: bless, create food and water, cure wounds, lesser
restoration, protection from poison, sanctuary, shield
1/day each: dream, greater restoration, scrying
Magic Weapons. The couatl's weapon attacks are magical.
Shielded Mind. The couatl is immune to scrying and to any
effect that would sense its emotions, read its thoughts, or
detect its location.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 8 (ld6 + 5) piercing damage, and the target must succeed
on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for
24 hours. Until this poison ends, the target is unconscious.
Another creature can use an action to shake the target awake.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
Medium or smaller creature. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 15). Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the couatl can't
constrict another target.
Change Shape. The couatl magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating equal to or
less than its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its
true form if it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is
absorbed or borne by the new form (the couatl's choice).
In a new form, the couatl retains its game statistics and
ability to speak, but its AC, movement modes, Strength,
Dexterity, and other actions are replaced by those of the new
form, and it gains any statistics and capabilities (except class
features, legendary actions, and lair actions) that the new
form has but that it lacks. If the new form has a bite attack, the
couatl can use its bite in that form.
Couatls are benevolent serpentine beings of great
intellect and insight. Their brilliantly colored wings and
gentle manner speak to their celestial origins.
Divine Caretakers. Couatls were created as
guardians and caretakers by a benevolent god not
worshiped since the dawn of time, and which is
forgotten now by all but the couatls themselves. Most of
the divine mandates given to these beings are long since
fulfilled or failed. However, a number of couatls still
watch over ancient power, await fulfillment of prophecy,
or safeguard the heirs of creatures they once guided
and protected. Regardless of a couatl's task, it prefers to
remain hidden, revealing itself only as a last resort.
Truth Tellers. A couatl can't lie, but it can withhold
information, answer questions vaguely, or allow
others to jump to the wrong conclusions if doing so is
necessary to protect something, to keep promises, or to
hide the secret of its existence.
Ancient and Few. A couatl can live for ages without
sustenance, even surviving without air, but these
creatures can die of disease or the passage of time. A
couatl can sense its end up to a century beforehand, but
it has no insight into the manner of its demise.
If a couatl has already accomplished what it set out
to do, it accepts its fate. However, if its imminent death
endangers the completion of its goals, it actively seeks
out another couatl with which to produce offspring.
The mating ritual of couatls is a beautiful and
elaborate dance of magic and light, which results in
a gem-like egg from which a new couatl hatches. The^
parent that sought out the mate raises the newborn
couatl and instructs it as to its duties, so that it.can
complete whatever task the parent leaves unfinished.
iionAri.
43
Crawling Claw
"Tiny undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)       14 (+2)      11 (+0)       5 (-3)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 10
Languages understands Common but can't speak
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Turn Immunity. The claw is immune to effects that
turn undead.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
' target. Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) bludgeoning or slashing damage
i  (claw's choice).
Crawling Claw
Crawling claws are the severed hands of murderers
animated by dark magic so that they can go on killing.
Wizards and warlocks of a dark bent use crawling claws
as extra hands in their labors.
Magical Origins. Through dark necromantic rituals,
the life force of a murderer is bound to its severed hand,
haunting and animating it. If a dead murderer's spirit
already manifests as another undead creature, if the
murderer is raised from death, or if the spirit has long
passed on to another plane, the ritual fails.
The ritual invoked to create a crawling claw works
best with a hand recently severed from a murderer. To
this end, ritualists and their servants frequent public
executions to gain possession of suitable hands, or
make bargains with assassins and torturers.
Creator's Control. A crawling claw can't be turned,
nor can it be controlled by spells that control undead.
These foul monsters are entirely bound to the will of
their creator, which can concentrate on a claw in sight
to mentally command its every action. If the crawling
claw's creator doesn't command it, the claw follows its
last command to the best of its ability.
Commands given to a crawling claw must be simple. A
claw can't be tasked with finding and killing a particular
person, because its limited senses and intelligence
prevent it from tracking and picking out specific
individuals. However, a command to kill all creatures
in a particular locale works. A crawling claw can easily
feel out the contours of keys and doorknobs, crawling
from room to room on a blind killing spree.
Malign Intelligence. A crawling claw possesses little
of the intellect and memories of the individual of which
it was once a living part. The hate, jealousy, or greed
that drove that person to murder lingers on, however,
amplified by the claw's torturous fragmented state.
Left to its own devices, a crawling claw imitates and
recreates the same murderous acts it committed in life.
Living Claws. If a crawling claw is animated from
the severed hand of a still-living murderer, the ritual
binds the claw to the murderer's soul. The disembodied
hand can then return to its former limb, its undead flesh
knitting to the living arm from which it was severed.
Made whole again, the murderer acts as though
the hand had never been severed and the ritual had
never taken place. When the crawling claw separates
again, the living body falls into a coma. Destroying the
crawling claw while it is away from the body kills the
murderer. However, killing the murderer has no effect
on the crawling claw.
Undead Nature. A crawling claw doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
■•'-•.....■'   -      —•"
" ~—                              ~*~
44
gtyWTttNG CLA1&
Cyclops
Cyclopes are one-eyed giants that eke out a meager
existence in wild lands. Isolationists by nature, they
avoid contact with other races and try to drive away
strangers in their territory.
Nonreligious. Legends claim that the Cyclopes are
the spawn of one of the gods of the giants, but these
creatures pay little heed to any deities. They see little
benefit in prayer and dislike ritual, which they perceive
as complex and foreign. However, a cyclops that gains
direct benefit from some site of divine power, or which is
threatened by a supernatural force or creature, will pay
homage as long as the benefit or threat remains.
Unsophisticated. Though they are reasonably
intelligent, cyclopes live simple, reclusive lives, keeping
herds of animals for food. They prefer to dwell alone
or in small family groups, lairing in caves, ruins, or
rough structures of dry stone construction they build
themselves. A cyclops keeps its herd animals with it at
night, sealing the entrance to its home with boulders to
let it serve double duty as a barn.
A cyclops lairs within a day's journey of other
cyclopes, so that they can meet to trade goods or seek
mates. They craft weapons and tools of wood and stone,
but will use metal when they can find it. Although
cyclopes understand the Giant tongue, they write
nothing and speak little, using grunts and gestures for
their interactions with each other.
Cyclopes don't use money for trade, but they value
gold, shells, and other glittering and colorful objects as
jewelry. A cyclops might wear a necklace strung with
feathers and silver coins, but also with pewter goblets,
cutlery, and other bits of ruined metal.
Unwise. Cyclopes aren't great thinkers or strategists.
Slow to learn and bound to their traditional ways, they
find innovation difficult. Although they are a terrifying
threat in combat due to their size and strength, they can
often be tricked by clever foes.
Cyclopes can be cowed and awed by obvious displays
of magic. Rustics with little exposure to magic, they can
be deceived into mistaking a warlock, cleric, or other
caster for a powerful divine figure. However, their sense
of pride causes them to react with vengeful, bloodthirsty
violence once they learn that the individual they
assumed was a "god" is a mere mortal.
Cyclops
Vj Huge giant, chaotic neutral
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 138 (12dl2 + 60)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
22 (+6)
DEX
11 (+0)
CON
20 (+5)
INT
M-i)
WIS
6 (-2)
CHA
10 (+0)
Senses passive Perception 8
Languages Giant
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Poor Depth Perception. The cyclops has disadvantage on any
attack roll against a target more than 30 feet away.
Actions
Multiattack. The cyclops makes two greatclub attacks.
Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
~. .—   ■ -^;.' - a
J
45
"*•    — '-■
___
- -'-»■■ --
-s-»A*

'ReM"">MEAGA1NWHv
Darkmantle
A darkmantle clings to cavern ceilings, remaining
perfectly still as it waits for creatures to pass beneath
it. From a distance, it can pass itself off as a stalactite
or a lump of stone. Then it drops from the ceiling and
unfurls, surrounding itself with magical darkness as it
engulfs and crushes its prey.
Darkmantles are found throughout the Underdark, but
they are equally common on the Shadowfell. Thriving in
that dark realm, they fill an ecological niche similar to
bats on the Material Plane. Intelligent creatures of the
Shadowfell sometimes train darkmantles as guardians
or companions.
Darkmantle
Small monstrosity, unaligned
Actions
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5)
Speed 10 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Skills Stealth +3
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Echolocation. The darkmantle can't use its blindsight
while deafened.
False Appearance. While the darkmantle remains motionless, it
is indistinguishable from a cave formation such as a stalactite
or stalagmite.
Crush. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the darkmantle
attaches to the target. If the target is Medium or smaller and
the darkmantle has advantage on the attack roll, it attaches by
engulfing the target's head, and the target is also blinded and
unable to breathe while the darkmantle is attached in this way.
While attached to the target, the darkmantle can attack no
other creature except the target but has advantage on its attack
rolls. The darkmantle's speed also becomes 0, it can't benefit
from any bonus to its speed, and it moves with the target.
A creature can detach the darkmantle by making a successful
DC 13 Strength check as an action. On its turn, the darkmantle
can detach itself from the target by using 5 feet of movement.
Darkness Aura (1/Day). A 15-foot radius of magical darkness
extends out from the darkmantle, moves with it, and spreads
around corners. The darkness lasts as long as the darkmantle
maintains concentration, up to 10 minutes (as if concentrating
on a spell). Darkvision can't penetrate this darkness, and no
natural light can illuminate it. If any of the darkness overlaps
with an area of light created by a spell of 2nd level or lower, the
spell creating the light is dispelled.
46       <i<
UAKKMANTLE
DtATH Knight
When a paladin that falls from grace dies without
seeking atonement, dark powers can transform the
once-mortal knight into a hateful undead creature. A
death knight is a skeletal warrior clad in fearsome plate
armor. Beneath its helmet, one can see the knight's
skull with malevolent pinpoints of light burning in its
eye sockets.
Eldritch Power. The death knight retains the ability
to cast divine spells. However, no death knight can
use its magic to heal. A death knight also attracts and
commands lesser undead, although death knights that
serve powerful fiends might have fiendish followers
instead. Death knights often use warhorse skeletons
and nightmares as mounts.
Immortal Until Redeemed. A death knight can arise
anew even after it has been destroyed. Only when it
atones for a life of wickedness or finds redemption can it
finally escape its undead purgatory and truly perish.
Lord Soth
Lord Soth began his fall from grace with an act of heroism,
saving an elf named Isolde from an ogre. Soth and Isolde
fell in love, but Soth was already married. He had a servant
dispose of his wife and was charged with murder, but fled
with Isolde. When his castle fell under siege, he prayed for
guidance and was told that he must atone for his misdeeds
by completing a quest, but growing fears about Isolde's
fidelity caused him to abandon his quest. Because his
mission was not accomplished, a great cataclysm swept
the land. When Isolde gave birth to a son, Soth refused to
believe that the child was his and slew them both. All were
incinerated in a fire that swept through the castle, yet Soth
would find no rest in death, becoming a death knight.
Death Knight
Medium undead, chaotic evil
i Armor Class 20 (plate, shield)
Hit Points 180 (19d8 + 95)
Speed 30 ft.
STR            DEX          CON            INT           WIS           CHA
20 (+5)      11 (+0)     20 (+5)      12 (+1)     16 (+3)     18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +9, Cha +10
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
. Languages Abyssal, Common
| Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
Magic Resistance. The death knight has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Marshal Undead. Unless the death knight is incapacitated,
it and undead creatures of its choice within 60 feet of it have
advantage on saving throws against features that turn undead.
Spellcasting. The death knight is a 19th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit
I with spell attacks). It has the following paladin spells prepared:
1st level (4 slots): commqnd, compelled duel, searing smitp
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, magic weapon
3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, elemental weapon
4th level (3 slots): banishment, staggering smite
5th level (2 slots): destructive wave (necrotic)
Actions
Multiattack. The death knight makes three longsword attacks.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) slashing damage, or 10 (ldlO +
5) slashing damage if used with two hands, plus 18 (4d8)
necrotic damage.
Hellfire Orb (1/Day). The death knight hurls a magical ball
of fire that explodes at a point it can see within 120 feet of it.
Each creature in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on that point
must make a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw. The sphere spreads
around corners. A creature takes 35 (10d6) fire damage and
35 (10d6) necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
Reactions____________________________
Parry. The death knight adds 6 to its AC against one melee
attack that would hit it. To do so, the death knight must see the
attacker and be wielding a melee weapon.

4,7:

*»*«««« THE ETERNAL,^<?KON you
vo«R oooM. CoME. foolishWs. PLUNDTE° Mv
i"easures^ ™«•«.' orHERS HAVfe TRrjv
A" HAVE .AILED.'  FROM yoli                      .   «•«■
SMALL BE WOVEN. AND YOUR BONES *V,LL crtpl,
;:o7°r:L-------:r:r
KNOW T„E SECRET TOTRUEIWortal|tyv
/»'
-Epitaph of a demilich
Demilich
Tiny undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 80 (20d4)
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)

STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
1 (-5)       20 (+5)      10 (+0)      20 (+5)     17 (+3)      20 (+5)
Saving Throws Con+6, Int +11, Wis +9, Cha +11
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
magic weapons
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison, psychic; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
| Condition Immunities charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, stunned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP)
Avoidance. If the demilich is subjected to an effect that allows
it to make a saving throw to take only half damage, it instead
takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, and only
half damage if it fails.
I Legendary Resistance (3/Dayj. If the demilich fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Turn Immunity. The demilich is immune to effects that
turn undead.
Actions
Howl (Recharge 5-6). The demilich emits a bloodcurdling
howl. Each creature within 30 feet of the demilich that can hear
the howl must succeed oti a DC 15 Constitution saving throw
or drop to 0 hit"points. On a successful save, the creature-is
frightened uhtil the end of its next turn.
Life Drain. The demilich targets up to three creatures that it
can see within 10 feet of it. Each target must succeed on a DC
19 Constitution saving throw or take 21 (6d6) necrotic damage,
and the demilich regains hit points equal to the total damage
dealt to all targets.
Legendary Actions
The demilich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
demilich regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Flight. The demilich flies up to half its flying speed.
Cloud of Dust. The demilich magically swirls its dusty remains.
Each creature within 10 feet of the demilich, including around
a corner, must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw
or be blinded until the end of the demilich's next turn. A
creature that succeeds on the saving throw is immune to this
effect until the end of the demilich's next turn.
Energy Drain (Costs 2 Actions). Each creature within 30 feet
of the demilich must make a DC 15 Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature's hit point maximum
is magically reduced by 10 (3d6). If a creature's hit point
maximum is reduced to 0 by this effect, the creature dies.
A creature's hit point maximum can be restored with the
greater restoration spell or similar magic.
Vile Curse (Costs 3 Actions). The demilich targets one creature
it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed on a
DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be magically cursed. Until the
curse ends, the target has disadvantage on attack rolls and
saving throws. The target can repeat the saving throw at the
end of each of its turns, ending the curse on a success.

-J.     ,-.f JMW.:~^* ■-
-■g-M-.lfcgfeJ---! ■ ■L'M-l^pjP-.
———-—-——-—--—-^-^
4»     m
PEMIXIOH
PEIMILICH
I
The immortality granted to a lich lasts only as long as
it feeds mortal souls to its phylactery. If it falters or fails
in that task, its bones turn to dust until only its skull
remains. This "demilich" contains only a fragment of
the lich's malevolent life force—just enough so that if it
is disturbed, these remains rise into the air and assume
a wraithlike form. The skull then emits a terrifying
howl that can slay the weak-hearted and leave others
trembling with fear. Left alone, it sinks back down and
returns to the empty peace of its existence.
Few liches seek to become demiliches, for it means an
end to the existence they hoped to preserve by becoming
undead. However, time can erode the lich's reason and
memory, causing it to retreat into its ancient tomb and
forget to feed on souls. The spells it once knew fade
from its mind, and it no longer channels the arcane
energy it wielded as a lich. However, even as a mere
skull it remains a deadly and vexing enemy.
Enduring Existence. Even after a lich is reduced to
a demilich state, its phylactery survives. As long as its
phylactery is intact, the demilich can't be permanently
destroyed. Its skull reforms after Id 10 days, restoring
the creature to its wretched state. If it has the presence
of mind to do so, a demilich can reclaim its former
power by feeding just one soul to its phylactery. Doing
so restores the demilich to lich form, reconstituting its
undead body.
Undead Nature. A demilich doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep. So great is a demilich's will to survive
that it always has the maximum number of hit points for
its Hit Dice, instead of average hit points.
A Djemilich's Lair      ____
A demilich hides its earthly remains and treasures in a
labyrinthine tomb guarded by monsters and traps. At the
heart of this labyrinth rests the demilich's skull and the
dust from its other bones.
In its crypt, a demilich has access to lair actions
and additional uses for its legendary actions. Its whole
lair also has unique traits. A demilich in its lair has a
challenge rating of 20 (24,500 XP).
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the demilich
rolls a d20. On a result of 11 or higher, the demilich
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects. It
can't use the same effect two rounds in a row.
•  The tomb trembles violently for a moment. Each crea-
ture on the floor of the tomb must succeed on a DC 19
Dexterity saving throw or be knocked prone.
•  The demilich targets one creature it can see within
60 feet of it. An antimagic field fills the space of the
target, moving with it until initiative count 20 on
the next round.
•  The demilich targets any number of creatures it can
see within 30 feet of it. No target can regain hit points
until initiative count 20 on the next round.
Lair Traits
A demilich's tomb might have any or all of the following
effects in place:
•  The first time a non-evil creature enters the tomb's
area, the creature takes 16 (3dl0) necrotic damage.
•  Monsters in the tomb have advantage on saving
throws against being charmed or frightened, and
against features that turn undead.
•  The tomb is warded against the magical travel of
creatures the demilich hasn't authorized. Such crea-
tures can't teleport into or out of the tomb's area
or use planar travel to enter or leave it. Effect^ that
allow teleportation or planar travel work within the
tomb as long as they aren't used to leave or enter, the
tomb's area.
If the demilich is destroyed, these effects fade over the
course of 10 days.
ACERERAK AND HlS DISCIPLES
The transformation into a demilich isn't a bitter end for
all liches that experience it. Made as a conscious choice,
the path of the demilich becomes the next step in a dark
evolution. The lich Acererak—a powerful wizard and
demonologist and the infamous master of the Tomb of
Horrors—anticipated his own transformation, preparing for
it by setting enchanted gemstones into his skull's eye sockets
and teeth. Each of these soul gems possessed the power to
capture the souls on which his phylactery would feed.
Acererak abandoned his physical body, accepting that it
would molder and dissolve to dust while he traveled the
planes as a disembodied consciousness. If the skull that
was his last physical remains was ever disturbed, its gems
would claim the souls of the insolent intruders to his tomb,
magically transferring them to his phylactery.
Liches who follow Acererak's path believe that by becoming
free of their bodies, they can continue their quest for power
beyond the mortal world. As their patron did, they secure
their remains within well-guarded vaults, using soul gems to
maintain their phylacteries and destroy the adventurers who
disturb their lairs.
Acererak or another demilich like him has a challenge
rating of 21 (33,000 XP), or 23 (50,000 XP) in its lair, and
gains the following additional action option.
Trap Soul. The demilich targets one creature that it can see
within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 19 Charisma
saving throw. On a failed save, the target's soul is magically
trapped inside one of the demilich's gems. While the soul is
trapped, the target's body and all the equipment it is carrying
cease to exist. On a successful save, the target takes 24
(7d6) necrotic damage, and if this damage reduces the target
to 0 hit points, its soul is trapped as if it failed the saving
throw. A soul trapped in a gem for 24 hours is devoured and
ceases to exist.
If the demilich drops to 0 hit points, it is destroyed and
turns to powder, leaving behind its gems. Crushing a gem
releases any soul trapped within, at which point the target's
body re-forms in an unoccupied space nearest to the gem
and in the same state as when it was trapped.
4-9
i. ■
DemOM
Spawned in thelnfinite Layers of the Abyss, demons
are the embodiment of chaos and evil—-engines of
destruction barely contained in monstrous form.
Possessing no compassion, empathy, or mercy, they
exist only to destroy.
Spawn of Chaos. The Abyss creates demons as
extensions of itself, spontaneously forming fiends out of
filth and carnage. Some are unique.monstrosities, while
others represent uniform strains virtually identical to
each other. Other demons (such as manes) are created
from mortal souls shunned or cursed by the gods, or
which are otherwise trapped in the Abyss.
Capricious Elevation. Demons respect power and
power alone. A greater demon commands shrieking
mobs of lesser demons because it can destroy any lesser
demon that dares to refuse its commands. A demon's
status grows with the blood it spills; the more enemies
that fall before it, the greater it becomes.
A demon might spawn as a manes, then become
a dretch, and eventually transform to a vrock after
untold time spent fighting and surviving in the Abyss.
Such elevations are rare, however, for most demons
are destroyed before they attain significant power. The
greatest of those that do survive make up the ranks of
the demon lords that threaten to tear the Abyss apart
with their endless warring.
By expending considerable magical power, demon
lords can raise lesser demons into greater forms, though
such promotions never stem from a demon's deeds or
accomplishments. Rather, a demon lord might warp a
manes into a quasit when it needs an invisible spy, or
turn an army of dretches into hezrous when marching
against a rival lord. Demon lords only rarely elevate
demons to the highest ranks, fearful of inadvertently
creating rivals to their own power.
Abyssal Invasions. Wherever they wander across the
Abyss, demons search for portals to the other planes.
They crave the chance to slip free of their native realm
and spread their dark influence across the multiverse,
undoing the works of the gods, tearing down civilizations,
and reducing the cosmos to despair and ruin.
. Some of the darkest legends of the mortal realm are
built around the destruction wrought by demons set
loose in the world. As such, even nations embroiled
in bitter conflict will set their differences aside to help
contain an outbreak of demons, or to seal off abyssal
breaches before these fiends can break free.
Signs of Corruption. Demons carry the stain of
abyssal corruption with them, and their mere presence
changes the world for the worse. Plants wither and die
in areas where abyssal breaches and demons appear.
Animals shun the sites where a demon has made a
kill. The site of a demonic infestation might be fouled
by a stench that never abates, by areas of bitter cold or
burning heat, or by permanent shadows that mark the
places where these fiends lingered.
Eternal Evil. Outside the Abyss, death is a minor
nuisance that no demon fears. Mundane weapons can't
stop these fiends, and many demons are resistant to
the energy of the most potent spells. When a lucky hero
k


manages to drop a demon in combat, the fiend dissolves
into foul ichor. It then instantly reforms in the Abyss, its
mind and essence intact even as its hatred is inflamed.
The only way to truly destroy a demon is to seek it in the
. Abyss and kill it there.
Protected Essence. A powerful demon can take steps
to safeguard its life essence, using secret methods and
abyssal metals to create an amulet into which part of
that essence is ceded. If the demon's abyssal form is
ever destroyed, the amulet allows the fiend to reform at
a time and place of its choosing.
Obtaining a demonic amulet is a dangerous
enterprise, and simply seeking such a device risks
drawing the attention of the demon that created it. A
creature possessing a demonic amulet can exact favors
from the demon whose life essence the amulet holds—
or inflict great pain if the fiend resists. If an amulet is
destroyed, the demon that created it is trapped in the
Abyss for a year and a day.
Demonic Cults. Despite the dark risks involved in
dealing with fiends, the mortal realm is filled with
creatures that covet demonic power. Demon lords
manipulate these mortal servants into performing ever
greater acts of depravity, furthering the demon lord's
ambitions in exchange for magic and other boons.
•However, a demon regards any mortals in its service as
tools to'use and then discard at its whim, consigning
their mortal souls to the Abyss.
Demon Summoning. Few acts are as dangerous as
summoning a demon, and even mages who bargain
freely with devils fear the fiends of the Abyss. Though
demons yearn to sow chaos on the Material Plane, they
show no gratitude when brought there, raging against
their prisons and demanding release.
Those who would risk summoning a demon might
do so to wrest information from it, press it into service,
or send it on a mission that only a creature of absolute
evil can complete. Preparation is key, and experienced
summoners know the specific spells and magic items
that can force a demon to bend to another's will. If a
single mistake is made, a demon that breaks free shows
no mercy as it makes its summoner the first victim
of its wrath.
Bound Demons. The Book of Vile Darkness, the
Black Scrolls ofAhm, and the Demonomicon oflggwilv
are the foremost authorities on demonic matters. These
ancient tomes describe techniques that can trap the
essence of a demon on the Material Plane, placing it
within a weapon, idol, or piece of jewelry and preventing
the fiend's return to the Abyss.
An object that binds a demon must be specially
prepared with unholy incantations and innocent blood.
It radiates a palpable evil, chilling and fouling the
air around it. A creature that handles such an object
experiences unsettling dreams and wicked impulses,
but is able to control the demon whose essence is
trapped within the object. Destroying the object
frees the demon, which immediately seeks revenge
against its binder.
Demonic Possession. No matter how secure its
bindings, a powerful demon often finds a way to escape
• an object that holds it. When a demonic essence
emerges from its container, it can possess a mortal host*
Sometimes a fiend employs stealth to hide a successful.'- (,
possession. Other times, it unleashes the full brunt" ofitSs
fiendish drives through its new form.
As long as the demon remains in possession of its
host, the soul of that host is in danger of being dragged
to the Abyss with the demon if it is exorcised from the
flesh, or if the host dies. If a demon possesses a creature
and the object binding the demon is destroyed, the,/,
possession lasts until powerful magic is used to drjve
the demonic spirit out of its host.
Demon Lords_____________o
The chaotic power of the Abyss rewards demoris'of
particular ruthlessness and ingenuity with a dark
blessing, transforming them into unique fiends whose
power can rival the gods. These demon lords rule
through cunning or brute force, hoping to one day claim
the prize of absolute control over all the Abyss.
Reward for Outsiders. Although most demon
lords rise up from the vast and uncountable mobs of
demons rampaging across the Abyss, the plane also
rewards outsiders that conquer any of its infinite layers.
The elven goddess Lolth became a demon lord after
Corellon Larethian cast her into the Abyss for betraying
elvenkind. Sages claim that the Dark Prince Graz'zt
originated on some other plane before stealing his
abyssal title from another long-forgotten demon lord.
Power and Control. The greatest sign of a demon
lord's power is its ability to reshape an abyssal realm. A
layer of the Abyss controlled by a demon lord becomes
a twisted reflection of that fiend's vile personality,
and demon lords seldom leave their realms for fear of
allowing another creature to reshape and seize it.
As with other demons, a demon lord that dies on
another plane has its essence return to the Abyss, where
it reforms into a new body. Likewise, a demon lord that
dies in the Abyss is permanently destroyed. Most demon
lords keep a portion of their essence safely stored away
to prevent such a fate.
Baphomet
The demon lord Baphomet, also known as the Horned
King and the Prince of Beasts, rules over minotaurs and
other savage creatures. If he had his way, civilization
would crumble and all races would embrace their base
animal savagery.
The Prince of Beasts appears as a huge, black-furred
minotaur with iron horns, red eyes, and a blood-soaked
mouth. His iron crown is topped with the rotting heads
of his enemies, while his dark armor is set with spikes
and skull-like serrations. He carries a huge glaive
named Heartcleaver, but often hurls it into the fray so as
to face his enemies with horns and hooves.
Demogorgon
The Sibilant Beast and the self-styled Prince of
Demons, Demogorgon yearns for nothing less than
undoing the order of the multiverse. An insane
assemblage of features and drives, the Prince of
Demons inspires fear and hatred among other demdrts
and demon lords.
5i
Demogorgon towers three times the height of
a human, his body as sinuous as a snake's and as
powerful as a great ape's. Suckered tentacles take
thfe place of his arms. His saurian lower torso ends
in webbed and clawed feet, and a forked tail whose
whip-like tips are armed with cruel blades. The Prince
of Demons has two baleful baboon heads, both of
them mad. It is only the conflict between the two
halves of his dual nature that keeps the demon lord's
ambitions in check.
Graz'zt
The demon lord Graz'zt appears as a darkly handsome
figure nearly nine feet tall. Those who refer to the
Dark Prince as the most humanoid of the demon
lords vastly underestimate the capacity for evil in his
scheming heart.
Graz'zt is a striking physical specimen, whose
demonic nature shows in his ebon skin, pointed ears,
yellow fangs, crown of horns, and six-fingered hands.
He delights in finery, pageantry, and sating his decadent
desires with subjects and consorts alike, among whom
incubi and succubi are often his favorites.
Juiblex
The demon lord of slimes and oozes, Juiblex is a stew
of noxious fluids that lurks in the abyssal depths. The
wretched Faceless Lord cares nothing for cultists
or mortal servants, and its sole desire is to turn all
creatures into formless copies of its horrid self.
In its resting state, Juiblex spreads out in a noxious
mass, bubbling and filling the air with a profound
stench. On the rare occasions when creatures confront
the demon lord, Juiblex draws itself up into a shuddering
cbne of slime striated with veins of black and green.
Baleful red eyes swim within its gelatinous body, while
dripping pseudopods of ooze lash out hungrily at any
creature they can reach.
LOLTH
The Demon Queen of Spiders is the evil matron of the
drow. Her every thought is touched by malice, and the
depth of her viciousness can surprise even her most
faithful priestesses. She directs her faithful while she
weaves plots across the worlds of the Material Plane,
looking forward to the time when her drow followers
bring those worlds under her control.
Lolth appears as a lithe, imperious drow matriarch
when she manifests to her followers in the mortal
realm, which she does with unusual frequency. When
battle breaks out—or if she has a reason to remind her
followers to fear her—Lolth's lower body transforms into
that of a huge demonic spider, whose spike-tipped legs
and mandibles tear foes apart.
Orgus
Known as the Demon Prince of Undeath and the Blood
Lord, the demon lord Orcus is worshiped by the undead
and by living creatures that channel the power of
undeath, A brooding and nihilistic entity, Orcus yearns
.to .make the rnultiverse a place of death and darkness,
forever unchanging except by his will.
Th| DBjjlon, Prince of Undeath iip'a foul;^nd corpulent
creature, with ^humanoid torso, powerful goat legs,
and the desiccated head of a ram. His sore-ridden body
stinks of disease, but his decaying head and glowing
red eyes are as a creature already dead. Great black
bat wings sprout from his back, stirring reeking air
as he moves.
Orcus wields a malevolent artifact known as the
Wand of Orcus, a mace-like rod of obsidian topped
by a humanoid skull. He surrounds himself with
undead, and living creatures not under his control are
anathema to him.
Yeenoghu
Known as the Gnoll Lord and the Beast of Butchery,
the demon lord Yeenoghu hungers for slaughter
and senseless destruction. Gnolls are his mortal
instruments, and he drives them to ever-greater
atrocities in his name. Delighting in sorrow and
hopelessness, the Gnoll Lord yearns to turn the world
into a wasteland in which the last surviving gnolls tear
each other apart for the right to feast upon the dead.
Yeenoghu appears as a huge, scarred gnoll with a
spiky crest of black spines, and eyes that burn with
emerald flame. His armor is a patchwork of shields and
breastplates claimed from fallen foes, and decorated by
those foes' flayed skins. Yeenoghu can summon a triple
flail he calls the Butcher, which he wields to deadly
effect or wills to fly independently into battle as he tears
foes apart with teeth and claws.
Other Demon Lords
No one knows the full number of demon lords that
rage in the Abyss. Given the infinite depths of that
plane, powerful demons constantly rise to become
demon lords, then fall almost as quickly. Among the
demon lords whose power has endured long enough
for demonologists to name them are Fraz-Urb'luu, the
Prince of Deception; Kostchtchie, the Prince of Wrath;
Pazuzu, Prince of the Lower Aerial Kingdoms; and
Zuggtmoy, Lady of Fungi.
Demon Types____________________
Demonologists organize the chaotic distribution of
demons into broad categories of power known as
types. Most demons fit into one of six major types, with
the weakest categorized as Type 1 and the strongest
as Type 6. Demons outside the six main types are
categorized as minor demons and demon lords.
Demons by Type Type      Examples
1	barlgura, shadow demon, vrock
2	chasme, hezrou
3	glabrezu, yochlol
4 5	nalfeshnee marilith
6	balor, goristro
53
Baior
GORISTRO
Figures of ancient and terrible evil, balors rule as
generals over demonic armies, yearning to seize power
while destroying any creatures that oppose them.
Wielding a flaming whip and a longsword that
channels the power of the storm, a balor's battle
prowess is fueled by hatred and rage. It channels this
demonic fury in its death throes, falling within a blast of
- fire that can destroy even the hardiest foes.
Barlgura_________________________
The barlgura represents the savagery and brutality
of the Abyss. Barlguras gather in packs to take down
tougher foes, keep gruesome trophies from their
victories, and decorate their territory with such objects.
A barlgura looks like a hulking orangutan with a
gruesome, drooping visage and tusks jutting from
its jaw. Standing just under 8 feet tall, it has broad
shoulders and weighs 650 pounds. It moves apishly
along the ground, but it climbs with great speed
and agility.
Chasme
m,'."t .■? ".{' rr------=------------------------------------------
This loathsome demon resembles an unspeakable
crossing of humanoid and fly. A chasme shuffles about
on four spindly legs that can find purchase on walls
and ceilings. A droning sound precedes the approach
of a chasme, inflicting foes with a terrible lethargy that
leaves them open to attack.
The lowly chasmes serve more powerful masters as
interrogators or taskmasters. A chasme lives to dole
out torture as punishment, and has a knack for spotting
demons that have deserted their lords. Capturing and
returning such traitors allows a chasme to torment the
victim without fear of reprisal.
Dretch___________________________
Dretches are among the weakest of demons—repulsive,
self-loathing creatures doomed to spend eternity in a
state of perpetual discontent. Their low intelligence
makes dretches unsuitable for anything but the simplest
tasks. However, what they lack in potential, they make
up for in sheer malice. Dretches mill about in mobs,
voicing their displeasure as an unsettling din of hoots,
snarls, and grunts.
Glabrezu_________________________
A glabrezu takes great pleasure in destroying mortals
through temptation, and these creatures are among the
few demons to offer their service to creatures foolish
enough to summon them.
Although glabrezus are devastating in combat, they
prefer to tempt victims into ruin, using power or wealth
as a lure. Engaging in guile, trickery, and evil bargains,
a glabrezu hoards riches that it uses to fulfill promises
to shortsighted summoners and weak-willed mortals.
However,- if its attempts to entice or deceive fail, a
glabrezu has the strength to fight and win.
The goristro resembles a fiendish minotaur towering
more than twenty feet tall. When controlled.by a demon
lord, goristros make formidable living siege engines and
prized pets. Goristros possess preternatural cunning
when navigating labyrinthine passages and shifting
corridors, pursuing foes in a terrifying hunt.
A hulking goristro sometimes bears a palanquins
carrying smaller demons on its broad shoulders, m*uch
like an elephant carries riders on its back.
Hezrou______________________.; ■■
Hezrous serve as foot soldiers in the demonic hordes of
the Abyss. Although physically powerful, they are "weak-_
minded and hezrous can easily be duped into sacrificing
themselves by more powerful demons. As they press
their attacks into the heart of an enemy's forces, their
foul stench can sicken even the toughest foes.
Manes____________________________
Souls of evil creatures that descend to the Lower
Planes are transformed into manes—the lowest form
of demonkind. These wretched fiends attack any non-
demon they see, and they are called to the Material
Plane by those seeking to sow death and chaos.
Orcus, the Prince of Undeath, has the power to
transform manes into undead monsters, most often
ghouls and shadows. Other demon lords feed on manes,
destroying them utterly. Otherwise, killing a manes
causes it to dissipate into a cloud of reeking vapor that
reforms into another manes after one day.
Marilith_______________________^_
Terrible to behold, a marilith has the lower body of a
great serpent and the upper torso of a humanoid female
with six arms.
Wielding a wicked blade in each of its six hands, a
marilith is a devastating foe that few can match in battle.
These demons possess keen minds and a finely honed
sense of tactics, and they are able to lead and unite
other demons in common cause. Mariliths are often
encountered as captains at the head of a demonic horde,
where they embrace any opportunity to rush headlong
into battle.
A_______________________________________________k>
Demon True Names
Though demons all have common names, every demon lord
I and every demon of type 1 through 6 has a true name that
it keeps secret. A demon can be forced to disclose its true
name if charmed, and ancient scrolls and tomes are said to
exist that list the true names of the most powerful demons.
A mortal who learns a demon's true name can use
powerful summoning magic to call the demon from the
Abyss and exercise some measure of control over it.
However, most demons brought to the Material Plane in this
manner do everything in their power to wreak havoc or sow
discord and strife.

53
Nalfeshnee
The nalfeshnee is one of the most grotesque demons—a
corpulent mockery of ape and boar standing twice the
height of a human, with feathered wings that seem
^po small for its bloated body. These brutish features
conceal a remarkable intelligence and cunning.
Nalfeshnees are devastating in combat, using
their wings to soar above the front ranks and reach
vulnerable adversaries that can be dispatched with little
effort. From the thick of battle, they telepathically bellow
commands to lesser demons, even as they inspire a
sense of dread that forces their foes to scatter and run.
Nalfeshnees feed on hatred and despair, but they
crave humanoid flesh above all else. They keep their
larders filled with humanoids abducted from the
Material Plane, then eat those creatures alive during
elaborate feasts. Thinking of themselves as refined and
cultured, nalfeshnees employ stained and rusted cutlery
when they dine.
Quasits infest the Lower Planes. Physically weak, they
keep to the shadows to plot mischief and wickedness.
More powerful demons use quasits as spies and
messengers when they aren't devouring them or pulling
them apart to pass the time.
A quasit can assume animal forms, but in its true form
it looks like a 2-foot-tall green humanoid with a barbed
tail and horns. The quasit has clawed fingers and toes,
ahd these claws can deliver an irritating poison. It
prefers to be invisible when it attacks.
i«P»-
dow Demon
When a demon's body is destroyed but the fiend is
_pr|evented from reforming in the Abyss, its essence
sometimes takes on a vague physical form. These
shadow demons exist outside the normal abyssal
I 'hierarchy, since their creation results most often from
■.mortal magic, not from transformation or promotion.
Shadow demons all but disappear in the darkness,
and they can creep about without making a sound. A
shadow demon uses its insubstantial claws to feast on
its victim's fears, to taste its memories, and drink in
its doubts. Bright light harries this fiend and shows its
distinct shape, resolving it from a blur of darkness to a
winged humanoid creature whose lower body trails off
into nothing, and whose claws rend a victim's mind.
Shadowy Nature. A shadow demon doesn't require
)&ii, food, drink, or sleep.
Vrock
Vrocks are dull-witted, capricious fiends that live only
to create pain and carnage. A vrock resembles a giant
hybrid of humanoid and vulture, its gnarled, bestial body
and broad wings stinking of offal.
W(^k^^oB^!e>hUmanoid flesh whenever they can.
stunning potential prey with an ear-splitting shriek, then
swooping down to attack with beak and claw. Vrocks
can shake their wings, releasing clouds of toxic spores.
Coveting pretty things, vrocks turn against each
other for the chance to lay claim to cheap jewelry or
ornamental stones. Despite their love of treasure, vrocks
are difficult to bribe, seeing no reason to bargain when
they can simply take what they want from a would-be
bargainer's corpse.
YOCHLOL__________________________________
The yochlols are the Handmaidens of Lolth—extensions
of the Spider Queen's will dedicated to acting as
her spies, taskmasters, and agents of villainy. They
attend their goddess in the Demonweb Pits, but Lolth
sometimes dispatches yochlols to the Material Plane
to guard her temples and to aid her most devout
priestesses. Yochlols don't form outside Lolth's realm of
the Demonweb, and they serve no demon lords except
their queen.
Outside the Abyss, a yochlol can assume the guise
of a female drow or monstrous spider to conceal its
demonic form. In its true form, the fiend appears as a
pillar of yellow slime with a single malevolent eye. In its
drow and true form, a yochlol's touch carries the same
venomous touch as its spider form's bite.
Ji__________________________________________k.
Variant: Demon Summoning
Some demons can have an action option that allows them to
summon other demons.
Summon Demon (1/Day). The demon chooses what to
summon and attempts a magical summoning.
•  A balor has a 50 percent chance of summoning ld8
vrocks, ld6 hezrous, ld4 glabrezus, ld3 nalfeshnees, ld2
mariliths, or one goristro.
•  A barlgura has a 30 percent chance of summoning one
barlgura.
•  A chasme has a 30 percent chance of summoning one
chasme.
•  A glabrezu has a 30 percent chance of summoning ld3
vrocks, ld2 hezrous, or one glabrezu.
•  A hezrou has a 30 percent chance of summoning 2d6
dretches or one hezrou.
•  A marilith has a 50 percent chance of summoning ld6
vrocks, ld4 hezrous, ld3 glabrezus, ld2 nalfeshnees, or
one marilith.
•  A nalfeshnee has a 50 percent chance of summoning ld4
vrocks, ld3 hezrous, ld2 glabrezus, or one nalfeshnee.
•  A vrock has a 30 percent chance of summoning 2d4
dretches or one vrock.
•  A yochlol has a 50 percent chance of summoning one
yochlol.
A summoned demon appears in an unoccupied space within
60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and
can't summon other demons. It remains for 1 minute, until
it or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it
as an action.

54
Balor
Huge fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 262 (21dl2+126)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
26 (+8)      15 (+2)     22 (+6)      20 (+5)     16 (+3)     22 (+6)
Saving Throws Str +14, Con +12, Wis +9, Cha +12
Damage Resistances cold, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
I Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 19 (22,000 XP)
Death Throes. When the balor dies, it explodes, and each
creature within 30 feet of it must make a DC 20 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 70 (20d6) fire damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one. The explosion
ignites flammable objects in that area that aren't being worn or
carried, and it destroys the balor's weapons.
L
Fire Aura. At the start of each of the balor's turns', each
creature within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6) fire damage, and
flammable objects in the aura that aren't being worh or carried
ignite. A creature that touches the balor ot hits it with a melee
attack while within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6) fire damage.
Magic Resistance. The balor has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The balor's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The balor makes two attacks: one with its
longsword and one with its whip.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) slashing damage plus 13 (3d8)
lightning damage. If the balor scores a critical hit, it rolls
damage dice three times, instead of twice.
Whip. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 30 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage plus 10 (3d6) fire damage,
and the target must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw
or be pulled up to 25 feet toward the balor.
Teleport. The balor magically teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
-&
55
Barlgura
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8dl0 + 24)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
^
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)       7 (-2)      14 (+2)       9 (-1)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge5 (1,800 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The barlgura's spellcasting ability is
Wisdom (spell save DC 13). The barlgura can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
1/day each: entangle, phantasmal force
2/day each: disguise self, invisibility (self only)
Reckless. At the start of its turn, the barlgura can gain
advantage on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during
that turn, but attack rolls against it have advantage until the
start of its next turn.
Running Leap. The barlgura's long jump is up to 40 feet and its
high jump is up to 20 feet when it has a running start.
Actions
Multiattack. The barlgura makes three attacks: one with its
bite and two with its fists.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
9 (ldl0 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
56
pEMD'NS
.
-iiU

Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 84 (13dl0 + 13)
Speed 20 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR
15 (+2)
DEX
15 (+2)
CON
12 (+1)
INT
11 (+0)
WIS
14 (+2)
CHA
10 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +5
Skills Perception +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Drone. The chasme produces a horrid droning sound to
which demons are immune. Any other creature that starts its
turn within 30 feet of the chasme must succeed on a DC 12
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes.
A creature that can't hear the drone automatically succeeds on
the save. The effect on the creature ends if it takes damage or if
another creature takes an action to splash it with holy water. If
a creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
it is immune to the drone for the next 24 hours.
Magic Resistance. The chasme has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Spider Climb. The chasme can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Dretgh
Small fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class ll (natural armor)
Hit Points 18 (4d6 + 4)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)       8 (-1)       3 (-4)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 60 ft. (works only with creatures
that understand Abyssal)
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Actions
Proboscis. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 16 (4d6+ 2) piercing damage plus 24 (7d6)
necrotic damage, and the target's hit point maximum is
reduced by an amount equal to the necrotic damage taken. If
this effect reduces a creature's hit point maximum to 0, the
creature dies. This reduction to a creature's hit point maximum
lasts until the creature finishes a long rest or until it is affected
by a spell like greater restoration.
Multiattack. The dretch makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld6) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (2d4) slashing damage.
Fetid Cloud (1/Day). A 10-foot radius of disgusting green gas
I extends out from the dretch. The gas spreads around corners,
and its area is lightly obscured. It lasts for 1 minute or until a
strong wind disperses it. Any creature that starts its turn in that
area must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be
poisoned until the start of its next turn. While poisoned in this
way, the target can take either an action or a bonus action on
its turn, not both, and can't take reactions.

57
■ ■■yj-^'f-a. "asET-
■VjVg^ , ■
«-~i~fafc
. ._.«fca»o
Glabrezu
llargefiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 157 (15dl0+75)
Speed 40 ft.
At will: darkness, detect magic, dispelmagic
1/day each: confusion, fly, power Word stun
Magic Resistance. The glabrezu has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions     ________- . .'
STR
20 (+5)
DEX
15 (+2)
CON
21 (+5)
INT          WIS
19 (+4)     17 (+3)
CHA
16 (+3)
Saving Throws Str +9, Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The glabrezu's spellcasting ability is
Intelligence (spell save DC 16). The glabrezu can innately cast
the following spells, requiring no material components:
Multiattack. The glabrezu makes four attacks: two with its
pincers and two with its fists. Alternatively, it makes two
attacks with its pincers and casts one spell.
Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is
a Medium or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 15).
The glabrezu has two pincers, each of which can grapple only
one target.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
7 (2d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
zaaEz
, uvre-,:
■Mtm»&»C.
58
OEMtjNS
I Goristro
f Huge fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 310 (23dl2+161)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX        CON
25 (+7)      11 (+0)     25 (+7)
INT          WIS          CHA
6 (-2)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)
f
Saving Throws Str +13, Dex +6, Con +13, Wis +7
Skills Perception +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmaglcal weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Abyssal
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
Charge. If the goristro moves at least 15 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 38 (7dl0) piercing damage. If the target is
a creature, it must succeed on a DC '21 Strength saving throw
or be pushed up to 20 feet.away and knocked prone,
Labyrinthine Recall. The goristro can perfectly recall any path ft
has traveled.
Magic Resistance. The goristro has advantage on saving throws  I
against spells and other magical effects.
Siege Monster. The goristro deals double damage to objects
and structures.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The goristro makes three attacks: two with its
fists and one with its hoof.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (3d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
Hoof. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 23 (3dl0 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 45 (7dl0 + 7) piercing damage.
59
Hezrou
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
,Hit Points 136 (13dl0 + 65)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
'   19 (+4)      17 (+3)      20 (+5)       5 (-3)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)
Saving Throws Str +7, Con +8, Wis +4
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Magic Resistance. The hezrou has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Stench. Any creature that starts its turn within 10 feet of the
hezrou must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw
or be poisoned until the start of its next turn. On a successful
saving throw, the creature is immune to the hezrou's stench
for 24 hours.
Actions
Multiattack. The hezrou makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit; 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
o this OHM**81-6
Manes
Small fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 9 (2d6 + 2)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)       9 (-1)       13 (+1)       3 (-4)       8 (-1)        4 (-3)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands Abyssal but can't speak
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions_____________________________
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (2d4) slashing damage.
=1
6o

}
The TEMpLE was st
CONCLUDED T*AT THE c    *' *'TH B°°V pARTS. Wg
* PO*ERFUL DEMON AND Nnr      "" S"MM°"E°
OURSELVES, WE CUT Sw„                    T° P'6C«
"tLUME, A YOUNG HALP c.
CH"ON.CUN;QHER 0NeZn      Vn**°-
CLEmental Evil
Marilith
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 189 (18dl0 + 90)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      20 (+5)     20 (+5)      18 (+4)     16 (+3)      20 (+5)
^^^———^—^—
I Saving Throws Str +9, Con +10, Wis +8, Cha +10
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
J Condition Immunities poisoned
1 Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13
1 Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
J Challenge 16 (15,000 XP)
Magic Resistance. The marilith has advantage on saving throws
, against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The marilith's weapon attacks are magical.
Reactive. The marilith can take one reaction on every turn
in a combat.
Actions
Multiattack. The marilith makes seven attacks: six with its
longswords and one with its tail.
Longsivord. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is Medium
or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 19). Until this grapple
ends, the target is restrained, the marilith can automatically hit
the target with its tail, and the marilith can't make tail attacks
against other targets.
Teleport. The marilith magically teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
Reactions____________________________
Parry. The marilith adds 5 to its AC against one melee attack
that would hit it. To do so, the marilith must see the attacker
and be wielding a melee weapon.
-     ■                               -- "
6i
m


Nalfeshnee
large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Actions
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 184 (16dl0    96)
Speed 20 ft., fly 30 ft.

L
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)      10 (+0)     22 (+6)      19 (+4)     12 (+1)      IS (+2)
Saving Throws Con +11, Int +9, Wis +6, Cha +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Magic Resistance. The nalfeshnee has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Multiattack. The nalfeshnee uses Horror Nimbus if it can.
It then makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with
its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 32 (5dl0 + 5) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Honor Nimbus (Recharge 5-6). The nalfeshnee magically
emits scintillating, multicolored light. Each creature within 15
feet of the nalfeshnee that can see the light must succeed on
a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a creature's
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the
creature is immune to the nalfeshnee's Horror Nimbus for the
next 24 hours.
Teleport. The nalfeshnee magically teleports, along with
any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
6*
-


Variant: Quasit Familiar
Mortal spellcasters interested in extraplanar familiars find
quasits easy to summon and eager to serve. The quasit plays
the part of the obsequious servant. It serves its master well,
but it goads the mortal to greater and greater acts of chaos
and evil. Such quasits have the following trait.
Familiar. The quasit can serve another creature as a
familiar, forming a telepathic bond with its willing master.
While the two are bonded, the master can sense what the
quasit senses as long as they are within 1 mile of each other.
While the quasit is within 10 feet of its master, the master
shares the quasit's Magic Resistance trait. At any time and
for any reason, the quasit can end its service as a familiar,
ending the telepathic bond.
Quasit
Tiny fiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotic evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 7 (3d4)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
5 (-3)
DEX
17 (+3)
CON
10 (+0)
INT
7 (-2)
WIS          CHA
10 (+0)     10 (+0)
Skills Stealth +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Abyssal, Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Shapechanger. The quasit can use its action to polymorph into
a beast form that resembles a bat (speed 10 ft. fly 40 ft.), a
centipede (40 ft., climb 40 ft.), or a toad (40 ft., swim 40 ft.),
or back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each
"• '»--"
form, except for the speed changes noted. Any equipment it is.
wearing or carrying isn't transformed. \% reverts to its true form
if it dies.
Magic Resistance. The quasit has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions        ____________'                      .      ■ /
Claws (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage, and
the target must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw
or take 5 (2d4) poison damage and become poisoned for 1
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Scare (1/Day). One creature of the quasit's choice within 20
feet of it must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or be   j
frightened for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if the quasit is  I
within line of sight, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Invisibility. The quasit magically turns invisible until it
attacks or uses Scare, or until its concentration ends (as if
concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the quasit wears or
carries is invisible with it.
"^ . .. — "i
. '-l1.1^.1^*- "y '
=S=
^9fF
63
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 66 (12d8+12)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
l(-5)
DEX         CON
17 (+3)      12 (+1)
INT
14 (+2)
WIS
13 (+1)
CHA
14 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Cha +4
Skills Stealth +7
Damage Vulnerabilities radiant
Damage Resistances acid, fire, necrotic, thunder; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities cold, lightning, poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Incorporeal Movement. The demon can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(IdlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Light Sensitivity. While in bright light, the demon has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the demon can
take the Hide action as a bonus action.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) psychic damage or, if the demon had
advantage on the attack roll, 17 (4d6 + 3) psychic damage.
Vrogk
Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 104 (lldl0 +44)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      15 (+2)      18 (+4)       8(-l)      13 (+1)       8 (-1)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +4, Cha +2
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Magic Resistance. The vrock has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The vrock makes two attacks: one with its beak
and one with its talons.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2dl0+ 3) slashing damage.
Spores (Recharge 6). A 15-foot-radius cloud of toxic spores
extends out from the vrock. The spores spread around
corners. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC
14 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned. While
poisoned in this way, a target takes 5 (IdlO) poison damage
at the start of each of its turns. A target can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success. Emptying a vial of holy water on the target also
ends the effect on it.
Stunning Screech (1/Day). The vrock emits a horrific screech.
Each creature within 20 feet of it that can hear it and that isn't a
demon must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or
be stunned until the end of the vrock's next turn.
=1    c
64

Yochlol
Medium fiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16d8 + 64)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      18 (+4)      13 (+1)      15 (+2)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex+6, Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +6
Skills Deception +10, Insight +6
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Shapechanger. The yochlol can use its action to polymorph
into a form that resembles a female drow or giant spider, or
back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form.
Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It
reverts to its true form if it dies.
Magic Resistance. The yochlol has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Spider Climb. The yochlol can climb difficult surfaces,
' including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Innate Spellcasting. The yochlol's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The yochlol can innately ca,st the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: detect thoughts, web
1/day: dominate person
Web Walker. The yochlol ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Actions
Multiattack. The yochlol makes two melee attacks.
Slam (Bite in Spider Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit,
reach 5 ft. (10 ft. in demon form), one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2)
bludgeoning (piercing in spider form) damage plus 21 (6d6)
poison damage.
Mist Form. The yochlol transforms into toxic mist or reverts to
its true form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is also
transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
While in mist form, the yochlol is incapacitated and can't
speak. It has a flying speed of 30 feet, can hover, and can
pass through any space that isn't airtight. It has advantage on
Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution saving throws, and it is
immune to nonmagical damage.
While in mist form, the yochlol can enter a creature's space
and stop there. Each time that creature starts its turn with
the yochlol in its space, the creature must succeed on a DC
14 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the start
of its next turn. While poisoned in this way, the target is
incapacitated.

65
Devils
Devils personify tyranny, with a totalitarian society
dedicated to the domination of mortal life. The shadow
of the Nine Hells of Baator extends far across the
multiverse, and Asmodeus, the dark lord of Nessus,
strives to subjugate the cosmos to satisfy his thirst for
power. To do so, he must continually expand his infernal
armies, sending his servants to the mortal realm to
corrupt the souls from which new devils are spawned.
Lords of Tyranny. Devils live to conquer, enslave,
and oppress. They take perverse delight in exercising
authority over the weak, and any creature that defies the
authority of a devil faces swift and cruel punishment.
Every interaction is an opportunity for a devil to display
its power, and all devils have a keen understanding of
how to use and abuse their power.
Devils understand the failings that plague intelligent
mortals, and they use that knowledge to lead mortals
into temptation and darkness, turning creatures into
slaves to their own corruption. Devils on the Material
Plane use their influence to manipulate humanoid
rulers, whispering evil thoughts, fomenting paranoia,
and eventually driving them to tyrannical actions.
Obedience and Ambition. In accordance with their
lawful alignment, devils obey even when they envy or
dislike their superiors, knowing that their obedience
will be rewarded. The hierarchy of the Nine Hells
depends on this unswerving loyalty, without which that
fiendish plane would become as anarchic as the Abyss.
At the same time, it is in the nature of devils to
scheme, creating in some a desire to rule that eclipses
their contentment to be ruled. This singular ambition
is strongest among the archdevils whom Asmodeus
appoints to rule the nine layers of the Nine Hells. These
high-ranking fiends are the only devils to ever sample
true power, which they crave like the sweetest ambrosia.
Dark Dealers and Soul Mongers. Devils are confined
to the Lower Planes, but they can travel beyond those
planes by way of portals or powerful summoning magic.
They love to strike bargains with mortals seeking to
gain some benefit or prize, but a mortal making such
a bargain must be wary. Devils are crafty negotiators
and positively ruthless at enforcing the terms of an
agreement. Moreover, a contract with even the lowliest
devil is enforced by Asmodeus's will. Any mortal
creature that breaks such a contract instantly forfeits its
soul, which is spirited away to the Nine Hells.
To own a creature's soul is to have absolute control
over that creature, and most devils accept no other
currency in exchange for the fiendish power and boons
they can provide. A soul is usually forfeited when a
mortal dies naturally, for devils are immortal and can
wait years for a contract to play out. If a contract allows
a devil to claim a mortal's soul before death, it can
instantly return to the Nine Hells with the soul in its
possession. Only divine intervention can release a soul
after a devil has claimed it.
TM IKFERN&I, HlBRAldHY__________
The Nine Hells has a rigid hierarchy that defines every
aspect of its society. Asmodeus is the supreme ruler
of all devils, and the only creature in the Nine Hells
with the powers of a lesser god. Worshiped as such
in the Material Plane, Asmodeus inspires the evil
humanoid cults that take his name. In the Nine Hells,
he commands scores of pit fiend generals, which in turn
command legions of subordinates.
A supreme tyrant, a brilliant deceiver, and a master
of subtlety, Asmodeus protects his throne by keeping
his friends close and his enemies closer. He delegates
most matters of rulership to the pit fiends and lesser
archdevils that make up the infernal bureaucracy of the
Nine Hells, even as he knows that those powerful devils
conspire to usurp the Throne of Baator from which he
rules. Asmodeus appoints archdevils, and he can strip
any member of the infernal hierarchy of rank and status
as he likes.
If it dies outside the Nine Hells, a devil disappears
in a cloud of sulfurous smoke or dissolves into a pool
of ichor, instantly returning to its home layer, where it
reforms at full strength. Devils that die in the Nine Hells
are destroyed forever—a fate that even Asmodeus fears.
Archdevils. The archdevils include all the current
and deposed rulers of the Nine Hells (see the Layers
and Lords of the Nine Hells table), as well as the dukes
and duchesses that make up their courts, attend them
as advisers, and hope to supplant them. Every archdevil
is a unique being with an appearance that reflects its
particular evil nature.
Greater Devils. The greater devils include the pit
fiends, erinyes, horned devils, and ice devils that
command lesser devils and attend the archdevils.
Lesser Devils. The lesser devils include numerous
strains of fiends, including imps, chain devils, spined
devils, bearded devils, barbed devils, and bone devils.
Lemures. The lowest form of devil, lemures are
the twisted and tormented souls of evil and corrupted
mortals. A lemure killed in the Nine Hells is only
permanently destroyed if it is killed with a blessed
weapon or if its shapeless corpse is splashed with holy
water before it can return to life.
Promotion and Demotion. When the soul of an evil
mortal sinks into the Nine Hells, it takes on the physical
form of a wretched lemure. Archdevils and greater
devils have the power to promote lemures to lesser
devils. Archdevils can promote lesser devils to greater
devils, and Asmodeus alone can promote a greater devil
to archdevil status. This diabolic promotion invokes a
brief, painful transformation, with the devil's memories
passing intact from one form to the next.
Low-level promotions are typically based on need,
such as when a pit fiend transforms lemures into imps
to gain invisible spies under its command. High-level
promotions are almost always based on merit, such
as when a bone devil that distinguishes itself in battle
is transformed into a horned devil by the archdevil it
serves. A devil is seldom promoted more than one step
at a time in the hierarchy of infernal forms.
Infernal Hierarchy
1. lemure
Lesser devils
2. imp
3. spined devil
4. bearded devil
5. barbed devil
6. chain devil
7. bone devil
Greater devils
8.  horned devil
9. erinyes
10. ice devil
11. pit fiend
Archdevils
12. duke or duchess
13. archduke or archduchess
Demotion is the customary punishment for failure or
disobedience among the devils. Archdevils or greatjer1
devils can demote a lesser devil to a lemure, whigti-
loses all memory of its prior existence. An archd,eij;il
can demote a greater devil to lesser devil status, but the
demoted devil retains its memories—and might seek
vengeance if the severity of the demotion is excessive.
No devil can promote or demote another devil that has
not sworn fealty to it, preventing rival archdevils from
demoting each other's most powerful servants. Since all
devils swear fealty to Asmodeus, he can freely demote
any other devil, transforming it into whatever infernal
form he desires.
The Nine Hells
The Nine Hells are a single plane comprising nine
separate layers (see the Layers and Lords of the Nine
Hells table). The first eight layers are each ruled by
archdevils that answer to the greatest archdevil of all:
Asmodeus, the Archduke of Nessus, the ninth layer.
To reach the deepest layer of the Nine Hells, one must
descend through all eight of the layers above it, in order.
The most expeditious means of doing so is the River
Styx, which plunges ever deeper as it flows from one
layer to the next. Only the most courageous adventurers
can withstand the torment and horror of that journey.
A__________________________________________k.
Devil True Names and Talismans
Though devils all have common names, every devil above a
lemure in station also has a true name that it keeps secret. A
devil can be forced to disclose its true name if charmed, and
ancient scrolls and tomes are said to exist that list the true
names of certain devils.
A mortal who learns a devil's true name can use powerful
summoning magic to call the devil from the Nine Hells and
bind it into service. Binding can also be accomplished with
the help of a devil talisman. Each of these ancient relics is
inscribed with the true name of a devil it controls, and was
bathed in the blood of a worthy sacrifice—typically someone
the creator loved—when crafted.
However it is summoned, a devil brought to the Material
Plane typically resents being pressed into service. However,
the devil seizes every opportunity to corrupt its summoner
so that the summoner's soul ends up in the Nine Hells.
Only imps are truly content to be summoned, and they easily
commit to serving a summoner as a familiar, but they still do   ,
their utmost to corrupt those who summon them.
^WAW^»,.MMIIUIAI,,Mi.!wLUIIIMUBJ»J.IIU^^
©7
i
V
9
Variant: Devil Summoning
Some devils can have an action option that allows them to
summon other devils.
Summon Devil (1/Day). The devil chooses what to
summon and attempts a magical summoning.
•  A barbed devil has a 30 percent chance of summoning one
barbed devil.
•  A bearded devil has a 30 percent chance of summoning
one bearded devil.
•  A bone devil has a 40 percent chance of summoning 2d6
spined devils or one bone devil.
•  An erinyes has a 50 percent chance of summoning 3d6
spined devils, ld6 bearded devils, or one erinyes.
•  A horned devil has a 30 percent chance of summoning one
horned devil.
•  An ice devil has a 60 percent chance of summoning one
ice devil.
•  A pit fiend summons 2d4 bearded devils, ld4 barbed
devils, or one erinyes with no chance of failure.
' A summoned devil appears in an unoccupied space within
60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and
can't summon other devils. It remains for 1 minute, until it
or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it
as an action.
"*'"'■.......                                                                    W
Barbed Devil (Hamatula)________
Creatures of unbridled greed and desire, barbed devils
act as guards to the more powerful denizens of the Nine
Hells and their vaults. Resembling a tall humanoid
covered in sharp barbs, spines, and hooks, a barbed
devil has gleaming eyes that are ever watchful for
objects and creatures it might claim for itself. These
1 fiends welcome any chance to fight when victory
promises reward.
Barbed devils are known for an alertness that makes
them difficult to surprise, and they attend to their duties
without boredom or distraction. They use their sharp
claws as weapons or hurl balls of flame at foes that try
to flee them.
SBearded Devil (Barbazu)
Bearded devils serve archdevils as shock troops,
. fighting shoulder-to-shoulder and reveling in the glory
of battle. They respond with violence to any slight,
real or imagined, gorging themselves on violence
as their infernal saw-toothed glaives carve a path
through their foes.
Layers and Lords of the Nine Hells
Layer	Layer Name Avernus	Archduke or Archduchess	Previous Rulers
1		Zariel	Bel, Tiamat
2	Dis	Dispater	—
3	Minauros	Mammon	—
4	Phlegethos	Belial and Fierna	—
5	Stygia	Levistus	Ceryon
6	Malbolge	Glasya	Malagard, Moloch
7	Maladomini	Baalzebui	—
8	Cania	Mephistopheles	—
9	Nessus	Asmodeus	—
A bearrjgd devil is humanoid in form, with polnte'd
ears, scaly skin, a long tail, and claws that clearly show
its fiendish nature. These devils take their names from
the snakelike growths that adorn their chins, which they
use to lash and poison enemies, weakening them with
their virulent venom.
Bone Devil (Osyluth)__________■
Driven by hate, lust, and envy, bone devils act as the
cruel taskmasters of the Nine Hells. They set weaker
devils to work, taking special delight in seeing fiends
that defy them demoted. At the same time, they long for
promotion and are bitterly envious of their superiors,
attempting to curry favor though it irks them to do so.
A bone devil appears as a humanoid husk, with dried
skin stretched tight across its skeletal frame. It bears a
fearsome skull-like head and the tail of a scorpion, and
a foul odor of decay hangs in the air around it. Though
they are devastating in combat with their claws, bone
devils also wield hooked polearms made of bone, which
they use to subdue enemies before striking with their
venomous tails.
Chain Devil (Kyton)_____________
This ominous fiend wears chains like a shroud. Driving
lesser creatures before it with its fearsome gaze, a chain
devil animates the chains that cover its body as well as
inanimate chains nearby, which sprout hooks, blades,
and spikes to eviscerate enemies.
Chain devils act as sadistic jailers and torturers in
the infernal realms, relishing pain and living to inflict
it on others. They are called on to torment mortal souls
trapped in the Nine Hells, inflicting their sadistic fury on
the horrid lemures in which those souls manifest.
Erinyes___________________________
The most beautiful and striking of all lesser and greater
devils, the erinyes are fierce and disciplined warriors.
Sweeping down from the skies, they bring swift death
to creatures that have wronged their masters or defied
the edicts of Asmodeus. The erinyes appear as male
or female humanoids with statuesque builds and large
feathery wings. Most wear stylized armor and horned
helms, and carry exquisite swords and bows. A few also
use ropes of entanglement to ensnare powerful foes.
Primary Inhabitants
Erinyes, imps, spined devils
Bearded devils, erinyes, imps, spined devils
Bearded devils, chain devils, imps, spined devils
Barbed devils, bone devils, imps, spined devils
Bone devils, erinyes, ice devils, imps
Barbed devils, bone devils, horned devils, imps
Barbed devils, bone devils, horned devils, imps
Horned devils, ice devils, imps, pit fiends
All devils
68
p.EVIfcS
Legends tell that the first erinyes were angels that
fell from the Upper Planes because of temptation or
misdeed. Erinyes are always willing to take advantage
of being mistaken for celestials in their missions of
conquest and corruption.
Horned Devil (Malebranche)
Horned devils are lazy to the point of belligerence and
reluctant to put themselves in harm's way. Moreover,
they hate and fear any creature stronger than
themselves. When they are sufficiently provoked or
antagonized, the fury of these fiends can be terrifying.
A malebranche stands as tall as an ogre and is
sheathed in scales as tough as iron. The flying infantry
of the hellish legions, horned devils follow orders to the
letter. Their huge wings and sweeping horns create an
intimidating presence as they drop from the sky and
strike with deadly forks and lashing tails.
Iqe Devil (Gelugon)______________
Found most commonly on the cold layers of Stygia and
Cania, ice devils serve as commanders of the infernal
armies of the Nine Hells, tormenting lesser devils as
an outlet for their anger and resentment. Coveting
the power of their pit fiend superiors, ice devils work
ceaselessly toward promotion, slaughtering the enemies
of the Nine Hells and claiming as many souls as they
can for their archdevil masters.
Resembling a giant bipedal insect, an ice devil has
clawed hands and feet, powerful mandibles, and a
long tail covered in razor-sharp spikes. Some carry
barbed spears whose icy touch can render a foe all but
helpless in combat.
Imp_______________________________
Imps are found throughout the Lower Planes, either
running errands for their infernal masters, spying on
rivals, or misleading and waylaying mortals. An imp will
proudly serve an evil master of any kind, but it can't be
relied on to carry out tasks with any speed or efficiency.
An imp can assume animal form at will, but in its
natural state it resembles a diminutive red-skinned
humanoid with a barbed tail, small horns, and leathery
wings. It strikes while invisible, attacking with
its poison stinger.
Lemure___________________________
A lemure arises when a mortal soul is twisted by evil
and banished to the Nine Hells for eternity. The lowest
type of devil, lemures are repugnant, shapeless creatures
doomed to suffer torment until they are promoted to a
higher form of devil, most commonly an imp.
A lemure resembles a molten mass of flesh with
a vaguely humanoid head and torso. A permanent
expression of anguish twists across its face, its feeble
mouth babbling even though it can't speak.
Variant: Imp Familiar
Imps can be found in the service to mortal spellcasters, acting
as advisors, spies, and familiars. An imp urges its master to
acts of evil, knowing the mortal's soul is a prize the imp might
ultimately claim. Imps display an unusual loyalty to their
masters, and an imp can be quite dangerous if its master is
threatened. Some such imps have the following trait.
Familiar. The imp can enter into a contract to serve
another creature as a familiar, forming a telepathic bond with
its willing master. While the two are bonded, the master can
sense what the imp senses as long as they are within 1 mile
of each other. While the imp is within 10 feet of its master,
the master shares the imp's Magic Resistance trait. If its
master violates the terms of the contract, the imp can end its
service as a familiar, ending the telepathic bond.
Pit Fiend
The undisputed lords of most other devils, pit fiends
attend the archdukes and archduchesses of the Nine
Hells and carry out their wishes. These mighty devils
are the generals of the Nine Hells, leading its infernal
legions into battle.
With an inflated sense of superiority and entitlement,
pit fiends form a grotesque aristocracy in the infernal
realm. These domineering and manipulative tyrants
conspire to eliminate anything that stands between
them and their desires, even as they negotiate the
convoluted and dangerous politics of the Nine Hells.
A pit fiend is a hulking monster with a whip-like tail
and enormous wings that it wraps around itself like a
cloak. Armored scales cover its body, and its fanged
maw drips a venom that can lay the mightiest mortal
creatures low. Fearless in battle, a pit fiend takes on the
most powerful foes in single combat, demonstrating
its supremacy and an arrogance that prevents it from
acknowledging any chance of defeat.
Spined Devil (Spinagon)__________
Smaller than most other devils, spinagons act as
messengers and spies for greater devils and archdevils.
They are the eyes and ears of the Nine Hells, and even
fiends that despise a spined devil's weakness treat it
with a modicum of respect.
A spined devil's body and tail bristle with spines, and
it can fling its tail spines as ranged weapons. The spines
burst into flame on impact.
When not delivering messages or gathering
intelligence, spined devils serve in the infernal legions
as flying artillery, making up for their relative weakness
by mobbing together to overwhelm their foes. Though
they crave promotion and power, spined devils are
craven by nature, and they will quickly scatter if a fight
goes against them.
69
Barbed Devil
Medium fiend (devil), lawful evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 110 (13d8 +52)
Speed 30 ft.
Saving Throws Str +5, Con +4, Wis +2
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
STR
16 (+3)
DEX         CON
17 (+3)      18 (+4)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)
Saving Throws Str +6, Con +7, Wis +5, Cha +5
Skills Deception +5, Insight+5, Perception +8
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Barbed Hide. At the start of each of its turns, the barbed devil
deals 5 (ldlO) piercing damage to any creature grappling it.
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The devil makes three melee attacks: one with
its tail and two with its claws. Alternatively, it can use Hurl
Flame twice.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 150 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. If the target is a flammable
object that isn't being worn or carried, it also catches fire.
--jgmfefaa
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Steadfast. The devil can't be frightened while it can see an
allied creature within 30 feet of it.
Actions
Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its beard
and one with its glaive.
Beard. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed
on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1
minute. While poisoned in this way, the target can't regain hit
points. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Claive. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ldlO + 3) slashing damage. If the target is a creature
other than an undead or a construct, it must succeed on a DC
12 Constitution saving throw or lose 5 (ldlO) hit points at the
start of each of its turns due to an infernal wound. Each time
the devil hits the wounded target with this attack, the damage
dealt by the wound increases by 5 (ldlO). Any creature can take
an action to stanch the wound with a successful DC 12 Wisdom
(Medicine) check. The wound also closes if the target receives
magical healing.

c=
-


Variant: Bone Devil Polearm
Some bone devils have the following action options.
Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its
hooked polearm and one with its sting.
Hooked Polearm. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach
10 ft., one target. Hit: 17 (2dl 2 + 4) piercing damage. If the
target is a Huge or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape
DC 14). Until this grapple ends, the devil can't use its
polearm on another target.
«JUl-MmiL.  I  Ul     ......   ■!}. l.-l-Ur.,^-~~--~-^-M|LU-WU|11..........I......U.U|Hi .IL,     1.^^.
-■  "   ■■-'''-   '"-■   '"■     -"    '          -            ------
^V-.aft»Ji^CT
■w^aja^     ■    -----
Bone Devil
Large fiend (devil), lawful evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 142 (15dl0 +60)
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      16 (+3)     18 (+4)      13 (+1)     14 (+2)      16 (+3)
I Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +7
I Skills Deception +7, Insight +6
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
{ Damage Immunities fire, poison
| Condition Immunities poisoned
i Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
' Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The devil makes three attacks: two with its claws
and one with its sting.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage plus 17 (5d6) poison
damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution
saving throw or become poisoned for 1 minute. The target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success.
■ -V- WXSsdW -UW. »-!-g5HCT
■»—-^ iii^tsy*- q- . ' -^a*
"^      v*»ja^..k';
-
i
PEVIL&.
7i
Chain Devil
Medium fiend (devil), lawful evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (10d8 + 40)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)      18 (+4)      11 (+0)     12 (+1)      14 (+2)
Saving Throws Con +7, Wis +4, Cha +5
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
I Damage Immunities fire, poison
T Condition Immunities poisoned
■ Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
■  Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
■  Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
■  darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
i
Actions
Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. The target is grappled
(escape DC 14) if the devil isn't already grappling a creature.
Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained and takes 7
(2d6) piercing damage at the start of each of its turns.
Animate Chains (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). Up
to four chains the devil can see within 60 feet of it magically
sprout razor-edged barbs and animate under the devil's
control, provided that the chains aren't being worn or carried.
Each animated chain is an object with AC 20, 20 hit points,
resistance to piercing damage, and immunity to psychic and
thunder damage. When the devil uses Multiattack on its turn,
it can use each animated chain to make one additional chain
attack. An animated chain can grapple one creature of its own
but can't make attacks while grappling. An animated chain
reverts to its inanimate state if reduced to 0 hit points or if the
devil is incapacitated or dies.
Reactions____________________________
Unnerving Mask. When a creature the devil can see starts its
turn within 30 feet of the devil, the devil can create the illusion
that it looks like one of the creature's departed loved ones
or bitter enemies. If the creature can see the devil, it must
succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened
until the end of its turn.
Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks with its chains.
.'^.ftWKfri. '
■■■MfcJMfa^.
■'
73
PEVrLS
BV THE SWORO AND K»U- BV
,THEV L1VE BV the                       NOTH,NO
TWSWORO. THEIR «^'
^^EDT°          o«THEBOOK,Of
VILE OABK^ESS
Variant: Rope of Entanglement
Some erinyes carry a rape of entanglement (detailed in the
Dungeon Master's Guide). When such an erinyes uses its
Multiattack, the erinyes can use the rope in place of two of
the attacks.
=
Erinyes
i'l\/ledium fiend (devil), lawful evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 153 (18d8+72)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      16 (+3)      18 (+4)      14 (+2)     14 (+2)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +8, Wis +6, Cha +8
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP)
Hellish Weapons. The erinyes's weapon attacks are magical
! and deal an extra 13 (3d8) poison damage on a hit (included in
the attacks).
Magic Resistance. The erinyes has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The erinyes makes three attacks.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit; 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (ldlO +
4) slashing damage if used with two hands, plus 13 (3d8)
poison damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 150/600
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage plus 13
(3d8) poison damage, and the target must succeed on a DC
14 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned. The poison
lasts until it is removed by the lesser restoration spell or
similar magic.
Reactions____________________________
Parry. The erinyes adds 4 to its AC against one melee attack
that would hit it. To do so, the erinyes must see the attacker
and be wielding a melee weapon.
-
•-iFXS&"l&
^■f
73
Horned Devil
Large fiend (devil), lawful evil
Actions
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 178 (17dl0 +55)
Speed 20 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)      17 (+3)      21 (+5)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Str +10, Dex +7, Wis +7, Cha +7
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Multiattack. The devil makes three melee attacks:'two with its
fork and one with its tail. It can use Hurl Flame in place of any
melee attack.
Fork. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft,, one target.
Hit: 10 (ld8 + 6) piercing damage. If the target is a creature
other than an undead or a construct, it must succeed on a DC
17 Constitution saving throw or lose 10 (3d6) hit points at the
start of each of its turns due to an infernal wound. Each time
the devil hits the wounded target with this attack, the damage
dealt by the wound increases by 10 (3d6). Any creature can take
an action to stanch the wound with a successful DC 12 Wisdom
(Medicine) check. The wound also closes if the target receives
magical healing.
Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 150 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (4d6) fire damage. If the target is a flammable
object that isn't being worn or carried, it also catches fire.
=^r
74
uivifcs
Variant: Ice Devil Spear
Some ice devils have the following action options.
Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its
spear and one with its tail.
Ice Spear. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6)
cold damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed
on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, or for 1 minute, its
speed is reduced by 10 feet; it can take either an action or a
bonus action on each of its turns, not both; and it can't take
reactions. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
' --- '                                  ■■'.-'.  —
•u!-Tv,-furMmm^--^-M~--r?Yva
Ice Devil
Large fiend (devil), lawful evil

Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 180 (19dl0 +76)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)      14 (+2)      18 (+4)      18 (+4)     15 (+2)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +9
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP)
\ Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
darkvision.
7 Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
) Multiattack. The devil makes three attacks: one with its bite,
one with its claws, and one with its tail.
1 -'-
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) cold damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d4 + 5) slashing damage plus 10 (3d6) cold damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 12 (2d6+ 5) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6)
cold damage.
Wall of Ice (Recharge 6). The devil magically forms an opaque
wall of ice on a solid surface it can see within 60 feet of it. The
wall is 1 foot thick and up to 30 feet long and 10 feet high, or
it's a hemispherical dome up to 20 feet in diameter.
When the wall appears, each creature in its space is pushed
out of it by the shortest route. The creature chooses which side
of the wall to end up on, unless the creature is incapacitated.
The creature then makes a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw,
taking 35 (10d6) cold damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
The wall lasts for 1 minute or until the devil is incapacitated
or dies. The wall can be damaged and breached; each 10-foot
section has AC 5, 30 hit points, vulnerability to fire damage,
and immunity to acid, cold, necrotic, poison, and psychic
damage. If a section is destroyed, it leaves behind a sheet of
frigid air in the space the wall occupied. Whenever a creature
finishes moving through the frigid air on a turn, willingly or
otherwise, the creature must make a DC 17 Constitution saving
throw, taking 17 (5d6) cold damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one. The frigid air dissipates
when the rest of the wall vanishes.
---- -

WVILS
H
Imp
Tiny fiend (devil, shapechanger), lawful evil
! Armor Class 13
I Hit Points 10 (3d4 + 3)
] Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft.
f
STR
6 (-2)
DEX
17 (+3)
CON
13 (+1)
INT          WIS
11 (+0)     12 (+1)
CHA
14 (+2)
Skills Deception +4, Insight +3, Persuasion +4, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Infernal, Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Shapechanger. The imp can use its action to polymorph into a
beast form that resembles a rat (speed 20 ft.), a raven (20 ft.,
fly 60 ft.), or a spider (20 ft., climb 20 ft.), or back into its true
form. Its statistics are the same in each form, except for the
speed changes noted. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying
isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the imp's
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The imp has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Sting (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage, and
the target must make on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw,
taking 10 (3d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
Invisibility. The imp magically turns invisible until it attacks or
until its concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). Any
equipment the imp wears or carries is invisible with it.
Lemure
Medium fiend (devil), lawful evil
Armor Class 7
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed IS ft.
STR
10 (+0)
DEX
5 (-3)
CON
11 (+0)
INT
l(-5)
WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      3 (-4)
Damage Resistances cold
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft, passive Perception 10
Languages understands Infernal but can't speak
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the lemure's
darkvision.
Hellish Rejuvenation. A lemure that dies in the Nine Hells
comes back to life with all its hit points in IdlO days unless it is  j
killed by a good-aligned creature with a bless spell cast on that
creature or its remains are sprinkled with holy water.
Actions
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: I
2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage.
j6
DfiVlKS
o-^G00MlS?,Fe
-YOOR**P-TO"       lTSpeoP«.*
_H6VlOBAM-1
Pit Fiend
Large fiend (devil), lawful evil
Magic Weapons. The pit fiend's weapon attacks are magical.
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 300 (24dl0 +168)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR
26 (+8)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
24 (+7)
INT          WIS
22 (+6)     18 (+4)
CHA
24 (+7)
Saving Throws Dex+8, Con +13, Wis +10
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 20 (25,000 XP)
Fear Aura. Any creature hostile to the pit fiend that starts its
turn within 20 feet of the pit fiend must make a DC 21 Wisdom
saving throw, unless the pit fiend is incapacitated. On a failed
save, the creature is frightened until the start of its next turn. If
a creature's saving throw is successful, the creature is immune
to the pit fiend's Fear Aura for the next 24 hours.
Magic Resistance. The pit fiend has advantage on saving
i throws against spells and other magical effects.
Innate Spellcasting. The pit fiend's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 21). The pit fiend can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: detect magic, fireball
3/day each: hold monster, wall of fire
Actions
Multiattack. The pit fiend makes four attacks: one with its bite,
one with its claw, one with its mace, and one with its tail.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (4d6 + 8) piercing damage. The target must succeed on
a DC 21 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned. While
poisoned in this way, the target can't regain hit points, and it
takes 21 (6d6) poison damage at the start of each of its turns.
The poisoned target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) slashing damage.
Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) bludgeoning damage plus 21 (6d6)
fire damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 24 (3d]0 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
-==:
- -     "    '        -  ■ ■     ■
"■fa-SM-
S^HttwJl
77

78
U \iy i ] a
s

V^
*
p
Spined Devil
Small fund (devil), lawful evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5)
Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      15 (+2)      12 (+1)      11 (+0)     14 (+2)      8 (-1)
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil's
darkvision.
Flyby. The devil doesn't provoke an opportunity attack when it
flies out of an enemy's reach.
Limited Spines. The devil has twelve tail spines. Used spines
regrow by the time the devil finishes a long rest.
Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its bite and
one with its fork or two with its tail spines.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (2d4) slashing damage.
Fork. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld6) piercing damage.
Tail Spine. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 20/80
ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6)
fire damage.
Dinosaurs
Dinosaurs, or behemoths, are among the oldest reptiles
in the world. Predatory dinosaurs are savage, territorial
hunters. Herbivorous dinosaurs are less aggressive, but
they might attack to defend their young, or if startled
or harassed.
Dinosaurs come in many sizes and shapes. Larger
varieties often have drab coloration, while smaller
dinosaurs have colorful markings akin to birds.
Dinosaurs roam rugged and isolated areas that
humanoids seldom visit, including remote mountain
valleys, inaccessible plateaus, tropical islands,
and deep fens.
Allosaurus_______________________
The allosaurus is a predator possessing great size,
strength, and speed. It can run down almost any prey
over open ground, pouncing to pull creatures down with
its wicked claws.
Ankylosaurus____________________
Thick armor plating covers the body of the plant-eating
ankylosaurus, which defends itself against predators
with a knobbed tail that delivers a devastating strike.
Some varieties of ankylosaurus have spiked tails that
deal piercing damage instead of bludgeoning damage.
Plesiosaurus_____________________
A plesiosaurus is a marine dinosaur whose compact
body is driven by powerful flippers. Predatory and
aggressive, it attacks any creature it encounters. Its
flexible neck accounts for a third of its total length,
letting it twist in any direction to deliver a powerful bite.
Pteranodon______________________
These flying reptiles have wingspans of 15 to 20 feet
and typically dive for small marine prey, though they
are opportunists and will attack any creature that
appears edible. A pteranodon has no teeth, instead
using its sharp beak to stab prey too large to swallow
with one gulp.
Trigeratops______________________
One of the most aggressive of the herbivorous
dinosaurs, a triceratops has a skull that flares out to
form a protective plate of bone. With its great horns
and formidable speed, a triceratops gores and tramples
would-be predators to death.
Tyrannosaurus Rex______________
This enormous predator terrorizes all other creatures in
its territory. Despite its size and weight, a tyrannosaurus
is a swift runner. It chases anything it thinks it can eat,
and there are few creatures it won't try to devour whole.
While prowling for substantial prey, a tyrannosaurus
subsists on carrion, and on any smaller creatures that
try to dart in to steal its meal.
__
------
Allosaurus
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 51 (6dl0+18)
Speed 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
19 (+4)      13 (+1)      17 (+3)
INT          WIS
2 (-4)      12 (+1)
CHA
5 (-3)
Skills Perception +5
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Pounce. If the allosaurus moves at least 30 feet straight toward
a creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn,
J that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw
or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the allosaurus can
make one bite attack against it as a bonus action.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage.
Ankylosaurus
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8dl2 + 16)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      11 (+0)      15 (+2)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (4d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
_■ -.»-~-gsa
______
._ I
79
;r'",..'
^w* i~— ,■
Plesiosaurus
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8dl0 +24)
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft.
Pteranodon
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class ]3 (natural armor)
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       15 (+2)      10 (+0)       2 (-4)       9 (-1)        5 (-3)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Skills Perception +1
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Hold Breath. The plesiosaurus can hold its breath for 1 hour.
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Flyby. The pteranodon doesn't provoke an opportunity attack
when it flies out of an enemy's reach.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) piercing damage.
.^a,"    TJ=
-=======:3


=WM-WMtJ!H
Triceratops
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 95 (10dl2 +30)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)       9 (-1)       17 (+3)       2 (-4)      11 (+0)       5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -—
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Trampling Charge. If the triceratops moves at least 20 feet
straight toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack on
the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength
saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone,
the triceratops can make one stomp attack against it as a
bonus action.
Actions
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 24 (4d8 + 6) piercing damage.
Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone
creature. Hit: 22 (3dl0 + 6) bludgeoning damage
cz
=
"-----------
£3H
TYrannosaurus Rex
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (13dl2+52)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
25 (+7)      10 (+0)      19 (+4)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       9 (-1)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The tyrannosaurus makes two attacks: one with
its bite and one with its tail. It can't make both attacks against
1 the same target.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 33 (4dl2 + 7) piercing damage. If the target is a Medium
I or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 17). Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the tyrannosaurus
| can't bite another target.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (3d8+ 7) bludgeoning damage.
8o
piNQjSAURS

Displacer Beast
This monstrous predator takes its name from its
ability to displace light so that it appears to be several
feet away from its actual location. A displacer beast
resembles a sleek great cat covered in blue-black fur.
However, its otherworldly origins are clear in its six
legs and the two tentacles sprouting from its shoulders,
both ending in pads tipped with spiky protrusions. A
displacer beast's eyes glow with an awful'malevolence
that persists even in death.
Unseelie Origins. Displacer beasts roamed the
twilight lands of the Feywild for ages, until they were
captured and trained by the Unseelie Court. The
warriors of the court selectively bred the beasts to
reinforce their ferocious and predatory nature, using
them to hunt unicorns, pegasi, and other wondrous
prey. However, it didn't take long for the displacer
beasts to use their malevolent intelligence to escape
their masters.
Running and breeding freely in the Feywild, the
displacer beasts soon came to the attention of the
Seelie Court. With blink dog companions at their side,
fey hunters drove these predators to the fringes of the
Feywild, where many crossed over to the Material
Plane. To this day, displacer beasts and blink dogs
attack each other on sight.
Love of the Kill. Displacer beasts kill not just for
food but also for sport. They target prey even when
not hungry, often toying with their victims to entertain
themselves until they are ready to eat. After killing
its prey using its tentacles, a displacer beast drags
the corpse to a quiet place where it can feed without
distraction.
Displacer beasts hunt alone or in small prides that
demonstrate skill at setting ambushes. A single beast
will strike and withdraw, luring prey into a densely
wooded area where its packmates wait. Packs of
displacer beasts hunting near trade roads recall the
frequency and schedule of regular caravans, laying
down afribushes to pick off those caravang.
\v
Displager Beast
Large monsi'rosity, lawful evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (10dl0 + 30)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)     16 (+3)      6 (-2)      12 (+1)      8 (-1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Avoidance. If the displacer beast is subjected to an effect that
allows it to make a saving throw to take only half damage, it
instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw,
and only half damage if it fails.
Displacement. The displacer beast projects a magical illusion
that makes it appear to be standing near its actual location,
causing attack rolls against it to have disadvantage. If it is hit
by an attack, this trait is disrupted until the end of its next
turn. This trait is also disrupted while the displacer beast is
incapacitated or has a speed of 0.
Actions
Multiattack. The displacer beast makes two attacks with its
tentacles.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (ld6)
piercing damage.
Prized Guards and Pets. Intelligent evil creatures
favor displacer beasts as pets, but a displacer beast
enters such an alliance only if it appears beneficial.^,;
A displacer beast might guard a vault or,ae,tA$$x'
bodyguard for a prominent individual.
ni.s'Pi
81
DOPPELGANGER

Doppelgangers are devious shapeshifters that take
on the appearance of other humanoids, throwing off
pursuit or luring victims to their doom with misdirection
and disguise. Few creatures spread fear, suspicion, and
deceit better than doppelgangers. Found in every land
and culture, they can take on the guise of any individual
of any race.
Stealing Secrets. A doppelganger's adopted form
allows it to blend into almost any group or community,
but its transformation doesn't impart languages,
mannerisms, memory, or personality. Doppelgangers
often follow or capture creatures they intend to
impersonate, studying them and probing their minds for
secrets. A doppelganger can read a creature's surface
thoughts, allowing it to glean that creature's name,
desires, and fears, along with a few scattered memories.
A doppelganger impersonating a specific creature as
Doppelganger
Medium monstrosity (shapechanger), neutral
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 52 (8d8 +16)
Speed 30 ft.
PF—«^—                               ---------—---------------------------
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      18 (+4)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)      14 (+2)
Skills Deception +6, Insight +3
; Condition Immunities charmed
: Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Shapechanger. The doppelganger can use its action to
polymorph into a Small or Medium humanoid it has seen, or
back into its true form. Its statistics, other than its size, are the
same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't
transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
Ambusher. The doppelganger has advantage on attack rolls
against any creature it has surprised.
Surprise Attack. If the doppelganger surprises a creature and
hits it with an attack during the first round of combat, the
target takes an extra 10 (3d6) damage from the attack.
Actions
Multiattack. The doppelganger makes two melee attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Read Thoughts. The doppelganger magically reads the surface
thoughts of one creature within 60 feet of it. The effect can
penetrate barriers, but 3 feet of wood or dirt, 2 feet of stone,
2 inches of metal, or a thin sheet of lead blocks it. While the
target is in range, the doppelganger can continue reading its
thoughts, as long as the doppelganger's concentration isn't
broken (as if concentrating on a spell). While reading the
target's mind, the doppelganger has advantage on Wisdom
(Insight) and Charisma (Deception, Intimidation, and
Persuasion) checks against the target.
part of a long-term plot might keep its double alive and
close at hand for weeks, probing the victim's mind daily
to learn how to behave and speak authentically.
Hedonistic Swindlers. Doppelgangers work alone
or in small groups, with group roles shifting from con
to con. While one doppelganger takes the place of a
murdered merchant or noble, the others take on a
number of identities as circumstances warrant, playing
the parts of family or servants while they live off the
victim's riches.
Changelings. Doppelgangers are too lazy or self-
interested to raise their young. They assume attractive
male forms and seduce women, leaving them to raise
their progeny. A doppelganger child appears to be a
normal member of its mother's species until it reaches
adolescence, at which point it discovers its true nature
and is driven to seek out its kind to join them.
8*      Ste.
DOPMaUANUER
Ifc
PfAGOLIGH
Even as long-lived as they are, all dragons must
eventually die. This thought doesn't sit well with
many dragons, some of which allow themselves to
be transformed by necromantic energy and ancient
rituals into powerful undead dracoliches. Only the
most narcissistic dragons choose this path, knowing
that by doing so, they sever all ties to their kin and the
dragon gods.
Beyond Death. A dracolich retains its shape and
size upon transforming, its skin and scales drawing
tight to its bones or sloughing away to leave a skeletal
form behind. Its eyes appear as glowing points of light
floating in shadowy sockets, hinting at the malevolence
of its undead mind.
Though many dragons pursue vain goals of
destruction and dominance, dracoliches are more
nefarious than the most evil dragons, driven to rule
over all. A dracolich is a fiendishly intelligent tyrant that
crafts complex webs of foul schemes, attracting servants
motivated by greed and a lust for power. Acting from
the shadows and actively plotting to keep its existence a
secret, a dracolich is a cunning and challenging foe.
Dracolich Phylacteries. Creating a dracolich requires
the cooperation of the dragon and a group of mages or
cultists that can perform the proper ritual. During the
ritual, the dragon consumes a toxic brew that slays it
instantly. The attendant spellcasters then ensnare its
spirit and transfer it to a special gemstone that functions
like a lich's phylactery. As the dragon's flesh rots
away, the spirit inside the gem returns to animate the
dragon's bones.
If a dracolich's physical form is ever destroyed, its
spirit returns to the gem as long as the two are on
the same plane. If the gem comes into contact with
another dragon's corpse, the dracolich's spirit can take
possession of that corpse to become a new dracolich. If
the dracolich's spirit gem is taken to another plane, the
dracolich's spirit has nowhere to go when its undead
body is destroyed and simply passes into the afterlife.
Dracolich Template
■ libni mi   i    ■■Mm......■—.—■■■—■.■■■■.!■——.—■■> — .i    ■—■—....   m   in      ii............i........■
Only an ancient or adult true dragon can be transformed
into a dracolich. Younger dragons that attempt to
undergo the transformation die, as do other creatures
that aren't true dragons but possess the dragon type,
such as pseudodragons and wyverns. A shadow dragon
can't be transformed into a dracolich, for it has already
lost too much of its physical form.
When a dragon becomes a dracolich, it retains its
statistics except as described below. The dragon loses
any trait, such as Amphibious, that assumes a living
physiology. The dracolich might retain or lose any or all
of its lair actions or inherit new ones, as the DM sees fit.
Type. The dracolich's type changes from dragon
to undead, and it no longer requires air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Damage Resistance. The dracolich has resistance to
necrotic damage.
Damage Immunities. The dracolich has immunity
to poison. It also retains any immunities it had prior to
becoming a dracolich.
Condition Immunities. The dracolich can't be
charmed, frightened, paralyzed, or poisoned. It also
doesn't suffer from exhaustion.
Magic Resistance. The dracolich has advantage on
saving throws against spells and other magical effects.
■ -LlCIt
I Adult Blue Dragoligh
Huge undead, lawful evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 225 (18dl2 f 108)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft.
1 —ti _.....j............
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
25 (+7)      10 (+0)     23 (+6)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)     19 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +11, Wis +7, Cha +9
Skills Perception +12, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances necrotic
Damage Immunities lightning, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dracolich fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The dracolich has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions__________________________
Multiattack. The dracolich can use its Frightful Presence.
I It then makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with
| its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 18 (2dl0 + 7) piercing damage plus 5 (ldlO)
lightning damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5'fte, one target.
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dracolich's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dracolich and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dracolich's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dracolich exhales
lightning in a 90-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in
that line must make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, taking
66 (12dl0) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
Legendary Actions___________________
The dracolich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
The dracolich regains spent legendary actions at the start
of its turn.
Detect. The dracolich makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dracolich makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dracolich beats its tattered
wings. Each creature within 10 feet of the dracolich must
succeed on a DC 21 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d6
+ 7) bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. After
beating its wings this way, the dracolich can fly up to half its
flying speed.
1*
Dragon, Shadow
Shadow dragons are true dragons that were either born
in the Shadowfell or transformed by years spent within
fits dismal confines. Some shadow dragons embrace
the Shadowfell for its bleak landscapes and desolation.
Others seek to return to the Material Plane, hungry to
spread the darkness and evil of the Plane of Shadow.
Dark Portals. Portals to the Shadowfell manifest
i in forlorn places and the deep gloom of subterranean
caverns. The dragons that lair in such places often
discover these portals and find themselves transported
• to a new realm. Ancient dragons that sleep in their lairs
.for months or years at a time might find themselves
spirited away, never knowing that a portal has formed
without their knowledge as they dream.
Recast in Shadow. The transformation to a shadow
dragon happens over a period of years, during which
time a dragon's scales lose their luster and fade to a
charcoal hue. Its leathery wings become translucent, its
eyes paling to pools of opalescent gray. Shadow dragons
find sunlight abhorrent, and they are weaker in bright
light than they are in darkness. Darkness makes the
dragon fade to a spectral shadow of its former self.
The magical nature of dragons holds an attraction
fpr the Shadowfell, which seems somehow to crave
the might and majesty of these great reptiles. The
Shadowfell also has a dispiriting effect on its denizens,
such that the longer a creature remains on the plane,
the more it accepts the plane's malaise. As months and
years pass for a dragon on the Shadowfell, it becomes
aware of the transformation being wrought upon it, and
yet can do nothing to prevent it.
Back in the World. A shadow dragon is so suffused
with the power of the Shadowfell that even a return to
the Material Plane can't undo its transformation. Some
shadow dragons attempt to lure other creatures from
the mortal realm back to the Shadowfell to keep them
company, at least until they tire of their guests and
devour them. Others are happy to leave the Shadowfell
behind forever, understanding that treasure and power
are easier to come by in the Material Plane.
Shadow Dragon Template_______
Only a true dragon can transform into a shadow dragon,
and only if it is born in the Shadowfell or remains there
for several years. A dracolich can't be turned into a
shadow dragon, since it loses its draconic nature when it
becomes undead.
When a dragon becomes a shadow dragon, it retains
its statistics except as described below. The shadow
6
INT          WIS
14 (+2)     11 (+0)
CHA
19 (+4)
dragon might retain or lose any or all of its lair actions
or inherit new ones, as the DM sees fit.
Damage Resistances. The dragon has resistance to
necrotic damage.
Skill Proficiency: Stealth. The dragon's proficiency
bonus is doubled for its Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
Living Shadow. While in dim light or darkness,
the dragon has resistance to damage that isn't force,
psychic, or radiant.
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the
dragon can take the Hide action as a bonus action.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the dragon
has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
New Action: Bite. If the dragon deals acid, cold, fire,
lightning, or poison damage with its bite, change that
damage type to necrotic.
New Action: Shadow Breath. Any damage-dealing
breath weapon possessed by the dragon deals
necrotic damage instead of its original damage type. A
humanoid reduced to 0 hit points by this damage dies,
and an undead shadow rises from its corpse and acts
immediately after the dragon in the initiative count. The
shadow is under the dragon's control.
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +8
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +8
Damage Resistances necrotic
Damage Immunities fire
Senses bllndslght 30 ft., darkvlslon 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Living Shadow. While in dim light or darkness, the dragon has
resistance to damage that isn't force, psychic, or radiant.
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the dragon can
take the Hide action as a bonus action.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the dragon has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6)
necrotic damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Shadow Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales shadowy
fire in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) necrotic
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. A humanoid reduced to 0 hit points by this
damage dies, and an undead shadow rises from its corpse and
acts immediately after the dragon in the initiative count. The
shadow is under the dragon's control.

V
_____
8S
Dragons
Chromatic Dragons1
True dragons are winged reptiles of ancient lineage and
fearsome power. They are known and feared for their
predatory cunning and greed, with the oldest dragons
' accounted as some of the most powerful creatures in
the world. Dragons are also magical creatures whose
innate power fuels their dreaded breath weapons and
other preternatural abilities.
Many creatures, including wyverns and dragon
turtles, have draconic blood. However, true dragons fall
into the two broad categories of chromatic and metallic
dragons. The black, blue, green, red, and white dragons
are selfish, evil, and feared by all. The brass, bronze,
copper, gold, and silver dragons are noble, good, and
highly respected by the wise.
Though their goals and ideals vary tremendously, all
true dragons covet wealth, hoarding mounds of coins
and gathering gems, jewels, and magic items. Dragons
with large hoards are loath to leave them for long,
venturing out of their lairs only to patrol or feed.
True dragons pass through four distinct stages of
life, from lowly wyrmlings to ancient dragons, which
can live for over a thousand years. In that time, their
might can become unrivaled and their hoards can grow
beyond price.
Dragon Ace Categories
Category	Size	Age Range
Wyrmling	Medium	5 years or less
Young	Large	6-100 years
Adult	Huge	101-800 years
Ancient	Gargantuan	801 years or more
Variant: Dragons as Innate Spellcasters
Dragons are innately magical creatures that can master a few
spells as they age, using this variant.
A young or older dragon can innately cast a number of
spells equal to its Charisma modifier. Each spell can be cast
once per day, requiring no material components, and the
spell's level can be no higher than one-third the dragon's
challenge rating (rounded down). The dragon's bonus to
hit with spell attacks is equal to its proficiency bonus + its
Charisma bonus. The dragon's spell save DC equals 8 + its
proficiency bonus + its Charisma modifier.
The black, blue, green, red, and white dragons represent
the evil side of dragonkind. Aggressive, gluttonous, and
vain, chromatic dragons are dark sages and powerful
tyrants feared by all creatures—including each other.
Driven by Greed. Chromatic dragons lust after
treasure, and this greed colors their every scheme
and plot. They believe that the world's wealth belongs
to them by right, and a chromatic dragon seizes that
wealth without regard for the humanoids and other
creatures that have "stolen" it. With its piles of coins,
gleaming gems, and magic items, a dragon's hoard is
the stuff of legend. However, chromatic dragons have
no interest in commerce, amassing wealth for no other
reason than to have it.
Creatures of Ego. Chromatic dragons are united by
their sense of superiority, believing themselves the most
powerful and worthy of all mortal creatures. When they
interact with other creatures, it is only to further their
own interests. They believe in their innate right to rule,
and this belief is the cornerstone of every chromatic
dragon's personality and worldview. Trying to humble
a chromatic dragon is like trying to convince the wind
to stop blowing. To these creatures, humanoids are
animals, fit to serve as prey or beasts of burden, and
wholly unworthy of respect.
Dangerous Lairs. A dragon's lair serves as the seat
of its power and a vault for its treasure. With its innate
toughness and tolerance for severe environmental
effects, a dragon selects or builds a lair not for shelter
but for defense, favoring multiple entrances and exits,
and security for its hoard.
Most chromatic dragon lairs are hidden in dangerous
and remote locations to prevent all but the most
audacious mortals from reaching them. A black dragon
might lair in the heart of a vast swamp, while a red
dragon might claim the caldera of an active volcano. In
addition to the natural defenses of their lairs, powerful
chromatic dragons use magical guardians, traps, and
subservient creatures to protect their treasures.
Queen of Evil Dragons. Tiamat the Dragon Queen
is the chief deity of evil dragonkind. She dwells on
Avernus, the first layer of the Nine Hells. As a lesser
god, Tiamat has the power to grant spells to her
worshipers, though she is loath to share her power. She
epitomizes the avarice of evil dragons, believing that
the multiverse and all its treasures will one day be hers
and hers alone.
Tiamat is a gigantic dragon whose five heads reflect
the forms of the chromatic dragons that worship her—
black, blue, green, red, and white. She is a terror on the
battlefield, capable of annihilating whole armies with
her five breath weapons, her formidable spellcasting,
and her fearsome claws.
Tiamat's most hated enemy is Bahamut the Platinum
Dragon, with whom she shares control of the faith
of dragonkind. She also holds a special enmity for
Asmodeus, who long ago stripped her of the rule
of Avernus and who continues to curb the Dragon
Queen's power.
86
D.RACJONS
^N
Ancient Black Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 367 (21d20+ 147)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
27 (+8)      14 (+2)      25 (+7)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)      19 (+4)
I Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +14, Wis +9, Cha +11
Skills Perception +16, Stealth +9
} Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26
( Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 21 (27,500 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
1 Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
I Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
I makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) acid damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
' Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit; reach 20 fti, one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a
90-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw, taking 67 (15d8)
acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
*-^- ^ i
■M  njm-JIW.  V -    W»Mim*U-              - ,^a. J. .- i g^
*£5

87
%v
Young Black Dragon
Adult Black Dragon
Huge dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 195 (17dl2 + 85)
Speed 4Q ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
Large dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (15dl0 + 45)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR
23 (+6)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
21 (+5)
INT
14 (+2)
WIS
13 (+1)
CHA
17 (+3)
%
I Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
I Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) acid damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8+ 6) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a
60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 18 Dexterity savingthrow, taking 54 (12d8)
acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
I successful one.
I Legendary Actions___________________
j The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check,
i Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
**«»

Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +10, Wis +6, Cha +8
\ Skills Perception +11, Stealth +7
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21
fjf Languages Common, Draconic
'Challenge 14 (11,500 XP)
88

DRAGONS
1

STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      14 (+2)      17 (+3)      12 (+1)     11 (+0)     15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6, Wis +3, Cha +5
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft,, passive Perception 16
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) acid damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a
30-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 14 Dexterity savingthrow, taking49 (lld8)
acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Black Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR          DEX        CON          INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      13 (+1)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)      13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (ld4) acid damage.
Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a
15-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 11 Dexterity savingthrow, taking 22 (5d8)
acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Black Dragon
The most evil-tempered and vile of the chromatic
dragons, black dragons collect the wreckage and
treasures of fallen peoples. These dragons loathe seeing
the weak prosper and revel in the collapse of humanoid
kingdoms. They make their homes in fetid swamps and
crumbling ruins where kingdoms once stood.
With deep-socketed eyes and broad nasal openings,
a black dragon's face resembles a skull. Its curving,
segmented horns are bone-colored near the base and
darken to dead black at the tips. As a black dragon ages,
the flesh around its horns and cheekbones deteriorates
as though eaten by acid, leaving thin layers of hide that
enhance its skeletal appearance. A black dragon's head
is marked by spikes and horns. Its tongue is flat with a
forked tip, drooling slime whose acidic scent adds to the
dragon's reek of rotting vegetation and foul water.
When it hatches, a black dragon has glossy black
scale. As it ages, its scales become thicker and duller,
helping it blend in to the marshes and blasted ruins that
are its home.
Brutal and Cruel. All chromatic dragons are evil, but
black dragons stand apart for their sadistic nature. A
black dragon lives to watch its prey beg for mercy, and
will often offer the illusion of respite or escape before
finishing off its enemies.
A black dragon strikes at its weakest enemies first,
ensuring a quick and brutal victory, which bolsters its
ego as it terrifies its remaining foes. On the verge of
defeat, a black dragon does anything it can to save itself,
but it accepts death before allowing any cither creature
to claim mastery over it.
Foes and Servants. Black dragons hate and fear other
dragons. They spy on draconic rivals from afar, looking
for opportunities to slay weaker dragons and avoid
stronger ones. If a stronger dragon threatens it, a black
dragon abandons its lair and seeks out new territory.
Evil lizardfolk venerate and serve black dragons,
raiding humanoid settlements for treasure and food to
give as tribute and building crude draconic effigies along
the borders of their dragon master's domain.
A black dragon's malevolent influence might also
cause the spontaneous creation of evil shambling
mounds that seek out and slay good creatures
approaching the dragon's lair.
Kobolds infest the lairs of many black dragons like
vermin. They become as cruel as their dark masters,
often torturing and weakening captives with centipede
bites and scorpion stings before delivering them to sate
the dragon's hunger.
Wealth of the Ancients. Black dragons hoard the
treasures and magic items of crumbled empires and
conquered kingdoms to remind themselves of their
greatness. The more civilizations a dragon outlasts,
the more entitled it feels to claim the wealth of current
civilizations for itself.
A Black Dragon's Lair
"""'-     '                .1    ii    ...           ......I» n.i'i.....inniriirj warm i -
Black dragons dwell in swamps on the frayed edges
of civilization. A black dragon's lair is a dismal cave,
grotto, or ruin that is at least partially flooded, providing
pools where the dragon rests, and where its victims can
ferment. The lair is littered with the acid-pitted bones
C|f previous victims and the fly-ridden carcasses of fresh
kills, watched over by crumbling statues. Centipedes,
scorpions, and snakes infest the lair, which is filled with
the stench of death and decay.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects;
the dragon can't use the same effect two rounds in a row:
•  Pools of water that the dragon can see within 120 feet
of it surge outward in a grasping tide. Any creature on
the ground within 20 feet of such a pool must succeed
on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be pulled up to
20 feet into the water and knocked prone.
•  A cloud of swarming insects fills a 20-foot-radius
sphere centered on a point the dragon chooses within
120 feet of it. The cloud spreads around corners and
remains until the dragon dismisses it as an action,
uses this lair action again, or dies. The cloud is
lightly obscured. Any creature in the cloud when it
appears must make on a DC 15 Constitution saving
throw, taking 10 (3d6) piercing damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A
creature that ends its turn in the cloud takes 10 (3d6)
piercing damage.
•  Magical darkness spreads from a point the dragon
chooses within 60 feet of it, filling a 15-foot-radius
sphere until the dragon dismisses it as an action, uses
this lair action again, or dies. The darkness spreads
around corners. A creature with darkvision can't see
through this darkness, and nonmagical light can't
illuminate it. If any of the effect's area overlaps with
an area of light created by a spell of 2nd level or lower,
the spell that created the light is dispelled.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary black dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
•  The land within 6 miles of the lair takes twice as long
as normal to traverse, since the plants grow thick and
twisted, and the swamps are thick with reeking mud.
•  Water sources within 1 mile of the lair are supernat-
urally fouled. Enemies of the dragon that drink such
water regurgitate it within minutes.
•  Fog lightly obscures the land within 6 miles of the lair.
If the dragon dies, vegetation remains as it has grown,
but other effects fade over ldlO days.
W
»9

Ancient Blue Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, lawful evil
| Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
I Hit Points 481 (26d20 + 208)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
29 (+9)      10 (+0)     27 (+8)      18 (+4)     17 (+3)      21 (+5)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +15, Wis +10, Cha +12
Skills Perception +17, Stealth +7
1 Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 23 (32,500 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
' throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
| Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
I makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 20 (2dl0 + 9) piercing damage plus 11 (2dl0)
lightning damage.
I Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
I Hit: 16 (2d6 + 9) slashing damage.
. Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for '
the next 24 hours.
Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning
in a 120-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw, taking 88 (16dl0)
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 24 Dexterity saving throw or take 16 (2d6 + 9)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
90
p.$AC?priS

Young Blue Dragon
Adult Blue Dragon
Huge dragon, lawful evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
■ Hit Points 225 (18d12+108)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
25 (+7)     10 (+0)     23 (+6)     16 (+3)     15 (+2)     19 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex+5, Con +11, Wis +7, Cha +9
Skills Perception +12, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) piercing damage plus 5 (ldlO)
lightning damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning
in a 90-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw, taking 66 (12d10)
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one.
Legendary Actions__________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d6 + 7)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
Large drogon, lawful evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 152 (16dl0 +64)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)     10 (+0)     19 (+4)      14 (+2)     13 (+1)     17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +8, Wis +5, Cha +7
Skills Perception +9, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) piercing damage plus 5 (ldlO)
lightning damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning
in an 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw, taking 55 (lOdlO)
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one.
Blue Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon, lawful evil
, Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (8d8+ 16)
Speed 30 ft., burrow IS ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX        CON          INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      10 (+0)     15 (+2)      12 (+1)     11 (+0)     15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +4
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions___________________________I
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: & (ldlO + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6)
lightning damage.
Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning  I
in a 30-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line
must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0)
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one.

Blue Dragon
Himijilljiiir   -
A BluVDfeAGON's LaIST
w#^
Vain and territorial, blue dragons soar through the skies
oyer deserts, preying on caravans and plundering herds
and settlements in the verdant lands beyond the desert's
reach. These dragons can also be found in dry steppes,
searing badlands, and rocky coasts. They guard their
territories against all potential competitors, especially
brass dragons.
—A blue dragon is recognized by its dramatic frilled
ears and the massive ridged horn atop its blunt head.
Rows of spikes extend back from its nostrils to line its
brow, and cluster on its jutting lower jaw.
A blue dragon's scales vary in color from an iridescent
azure to a deep indigo, polished to a glossy finish by the
desert sands. As the dragon ages, its scales become
thicker and harder, and its hide hums and crackles
with static electricity. These effects intensify when the
dragon is angry or about to attack, giving off an odor of
ozone and dusty air.
Vain and Deadly. A blue dragon will not stand for any
remark or insinuation that it is weak or inferior, taking
great pleasure in lording its power over humanoids and
other lesser creatures.
A blue dragon is a patient and methodical combatant.
When fighting on its own terms, it turns combat into an
extended affair of hours or even days, attacking from a
distance with volleys of lightning, then flying well out of
harm's reach as it waits to attack again.
Desert Predators. Though they sometimes eat cacti
and other desert plants to sate their great hunger, blue
dragons are carnivores. They prefer to dine on herd
animals, cooking those creatures with their lightning
breath before gorging themselves. Their dining habits
make blue dragons an enormous threat to desert
caravans and nomadic tribes, which become convenient
c'ollections of food and treasure to a dragon's eye.
When it hunts, a blue dragon buries itself in the desert
.sand so that only the horn on its nose pokes above the
surface, appearing to be an outcropping of stone. When
prey draws near, the dragon rises up, sand pouring from
its wings like an avalanche as it attacks.
Overlords and Minions. Blue dragons covet valuable
and talented creatures whose service reinforces their
sense of superiority. Bards, sages, artists, wizards, and
assassins can become valuable agents for a blue dragon,
which rewards loyal service handsomely.
A blue dragon keeps its lair secret and well protected,
and even its most trusted servants are rarely allowed
within. It encourages ankhegs, giant scorpions, and
other creatures of the desert to dwell near its lair for
additional security. Older blue dragons sometimes
attract air elementals and other creatures to serve them.
Hoarders of Gems. Though blue dragons collect
anything that looks valuable, they are especially fond
of gems. Considering blue to be the most noble and
beautiful of colors, they covet sapphires, favoring
jewelry and magic items adorned with those gems.
A blue dragon buries its most valuable treasures deep
in the sand, while scattering a few less valuable trinkets
in plainer sight over hidden sinkholes to punish and
eliminate would-be thieves.
4=
Blue df agons make their lairs in barren places,  '
using their lightning breath and their burrowing
ability to carve out crystallized caverns and tunnels
beneath the sands.
Thunderstorms rage around a legendary blue dragon's
lair, and narrow tubes lined with glassy sand ventilate
the lair, all the while avoiding the deadly sinkholes that
are the dragon's first line of defense.
A blue dragon will collapse the caverns that make up
its lair if that lair is invaded. The dragon then burrows
out, leaving its attackers to be crushed and suffocated.
When it returns later, it collects its possessions—along
with the wealth of the dead intruders.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects;
the dragon can't use the same effect two rounds in a row:
•   Part of the ceiling collapses above one creature that
the dragon can see within 120 feet of it. The creature
must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or
take 10 (3d6) bludgeoning damage and be knocked
prone and buried. The buried target is restrained and
unable to breathe or stand up. A creature can take an
action to make a DC 10 Strength check, ending the
buried state on a success.
•  A cloud of sand swirls about in a 20-foot-radius sphere
centered on a point the dragon can see within 120 feet
of it. The cloud spreads around corners. Each creature
in the cloud must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute. A creature
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
•   Lightning arcs, forming a 5-foot-wide line between
two of the lair's solid surfaces that the dragon can
see. They must be within 120 feet of the dragon and
120 feet of each other. Each creature in that line must
succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 10
(3d6) lightning damage.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary blue dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
•   Thunderstorms rage within 6 miles of the lair.
•   Dust devils scour the land within 6 miles of the lair. A
dust devil has the statistics of an air elemental, but it
can't fly, has a speed of 50 feet, and has an Intelligence
and Charisma of 1 (-5).
•   Hidden sinkholes form in and around the dragon's
lair. A sinkhole can be spotted from a safe distance
with a successful DC 20 Wisdom (Perception) check.
Otherwise, the first creature to step on the thin
crust covering the sinkhole must succeed on a DC
15 Dexterity saving throw or fall ld6 x 10 feet into
the sinkhole.
If the dragon dies, the dust devils disappear
immediately, and the thunderstorms abate within ldlO
days. Any sinkholes remain where they are.
9*
^
IONS
Ancient Green Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, lawful evil
Armor Class 21 (natural armor)
Hit Points 385 (22d20+154)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
27 (+8)      12 (+1)     25 (+7)      20 (+5)     17 (+3)     19 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +14, Wis +10, Cha +11
Skills Deception+11, Insight+10, Perception +17,
Persuasion +11, Stealth +8
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses bilndsight 60 ft., darkvlsion 120 ft., passive Perception 27
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 22 (30,000 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
' Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6)
I poison damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target,
Hit: 22 (4d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 20 ft,, one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous
gas in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 22 Constitution saving throw, taking 77 (22d6) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Legendary Actions___________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
-   - - ■■-
33SSC
:22s
" ■   ",
=3
HI   M
93
[ Adult Green Dragon
Huge dragon, lawful evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 207 (18dl2 + 90)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      12 (+1)      21 (+5)      18 (+4)     15 (+2)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +10, Wis +7, Cha +8
Skills Deception +8, Insight +7, Perception +12,
Persuasion +8, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
) Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6)
poison damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +1,1 to hit, reach 5 ft>i one target.
Hit:13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous
gas in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Legendary Actions__________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
(Young Green Dragon
Large dragon, lawful evil
a Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16dl0 +48)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX        CON          INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      12 (+1)      17 (+3)      16 (+3)     13 (+1)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +4, Cha +5
Skills Deception +5, Perception +7, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities poison
i Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive
Perception 17
1 Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Actions-        '   •-;' "',';■.-f-     *\ ,-~ <%
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6)
poison damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous
gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
9+
§BA§bNS
- .
____
Green Dragon
The most cunning and treacherous of true dragons,
'green dragons use misdirection and trickery to get the
upper hand against their enemies. Nasty tempered and
thoroughly evil, they take special pleasure in subverting
and corrupting the good-hearted. In the ancient forests
they roam, green dragons demonstrate an aggression
that is often less about territory than it is about gaining
power and wealth with as little effort as possible.
A green dragon is recognized by its curved jawline
and the crest that begins near its eyes and continues
down its spine, reaching full height just behind the skull.
A green dragon has no external ears, but bears leathery
spiked plates that run down the sides of its neck.
A wyrmling green dragon's thin scales are a shade
of green so dark as to appear nearly black. As a green
dragon ages, its scales grow larger and lighter, turning
shades of forest, emerald, and olive green to help it
blend in with its wooded surroundings. Its wings have
a dappled pattern, darker near the leading edges and
lighter toward the trailing edges.
A green dragon's legs are longer in relation to its body
than with any other dragon, enabling it to easily pass
over underbrush and forest debris when it walks. With
its equally long neck, an older green dragon can peer
over the tops of trees without rearing up.
Capricious Hunters. A green dragon hunts by
patrolling its forest territory from the air and the
ground. It eats any creature it can see, and will consume
shrubs and small trees when hungry enough, but its
favorite prey is elves.
E=
-----
»- W^taHJU^HiAriMMM
Green Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon, lawful evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 38 (7d8 + 7)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR
DEX         CON
INT
WIS
CHA
15 (+2)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)     11 (+0)     13 (+1)
I Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
i Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities poison
,( Condition Immunities poisoned
' Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
I Languages Draconic
( Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) poison damage.
Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous
gas in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 21 (6d6) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Green dragons are consummate liars and masters of
double talk. They favor intimidation of lesser creatures,',?
but employ more subtle manipulations when dealing
with other dragons. A green dragon attacks animals arid-
monsters with no provocation, especially when dealing
with potential threats to its territory. When dealing with
sentient creatures, a green dragon demonstrates a lust
for power that rivals its draconic desire for treasure, and
it is always on the lookout for creatures that can help it
further its ambitions.
A green dragon stalks its victims as it plans its
assault, sometimes shadowing creatures for days. t
If a target is weak, the dragon enjoys the terror its
appearance evokes before it attacks. It never slays all its
foes, preferring to use intimidation to establish control
over survivors. It then learns what it can about othijr
creatures' activities near its territory, and about any
treasure to be found nearby. Green dragons occasionally
release prisoners if they can be ransomed. Otherwise, a
creature must prove its value to the dragon daily or die.
Manipulative Schemers. A wily and subtle creature,
a green dragon bends other creatures to its will
by assessing and playing off their deepest desires.
Any creature foolish enough to attempt to subdue a
green dragon eventually realizes that the creature
is only pretending to serve while it assesses its
would-be master.
When manipulating other creatures, green dragons
are honey-tongued, smooth, and sophisticated. Among
their own kind, they are loud, crass, and rude, especially
when dealing with dragons of the same age and status.
Conflict and Corruption. Green dragons sometimes
clash with other dragons over territory where forest
crosses over into other terrain. A green dragon typically
pretends to back down, only to wait and watch—
sometimes for decades—for the chance to slay the other
dragon, then claim its lair and hoard.
Green dragons accept the servitude of sentient
creatures such as goblinoids, ettercaps, ettins, kobolds,
ores, and yuan-ti. They also delight in corrupting and
bending elves to their will. A green dragon sometimes
wracks its minions' minds with fear to the point of
insanity, with the fog that spreads throughout its forest
reflecting those minions' tortured dreams.
Living Treasures. A green dragon's favored treasures
are the sentient creatures it bends to its will, including
significant figures such as popular heroes, well-known
sages, and renowned bards. Among material treasures,
a green dragon favors emeralds, wood carvings, musical
instruments, and sculptures of humanoid subjects.
A Green Dragon's Lair__________^
The forest-loving green dragons sometimes compete
for territory with black dragons in marshy woods and
with white dragons in subarctic taiga. However, a forest
controlled by a green dragon is easy to spot. A perpetual
fog hangs in the air in a legendary green dragon's wood,
carrying an acrid whiff of the creature's poison breath.
The moss-covered trees grow close together except
where winding pathways trace their way like a maze
into the heart of the forest. The light that reaches^th<§
95
it.
96
forest floor carries an emerald green cast, and every
sound seems muffled.
At the center of its forest, a green dragon chooses
a cave in a sheer cliff or hillside for its lair, preferring
an entrance hidden from prying eyes. Some seek out
cave mouths concealed behind waterfalls, or partly
submerged caverns that can be accessed through lakes
or streams. Others conceal the entrances to their lairs
with vegetation.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects;
the dragon can't use the same effect two rounds in a row:
•  Grasping roots and vines erupt in a 20-foot radius
centered on a point on the ground that the dragon
can see within 120 feet of it. That area becomes dif-
ficult terrain, and each creature there must succeed
on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be restrained
by the roots and vines. A creature can be freed if it
or another creature takes an action to make a DC 15
Strength check and succeeds. The roots and vines
wilt away when the dragon uses this lair action again
or when the dragon dies.
•  A wall of tangled brush bristling with thorns springs
into existence on a solid surface within 120 feet of the
dragon. The wall is up to 60 feet long, 10 feet high,
and 5 feet thick, and it blocks line of sight. When the
wall appears, each creature in its area must make a
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. A creature that fails the
save takes 18 (4d8) piercing damage and is pushed 5
feet out of the wall's space, appearing on whichever
side of the wall it wants. A creature can move through
the wall, albeit slowly and painfully. For every 1 foot a
creature travels through the wall, it must spend 4 feet
p'f movement. Furthermore, a creature in the wall's
space must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw
once each round it's in contact with the wall, taking
18 (4d8) piercing damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one. Each 10-foot sec-
tion of wall has AC 5,15 hit points, vulnerability to
fire damage, resistance to bludgeoning and piercing
damage, and immunity to psychic damage. The wall
sinks back into the ground when the dragon uses this
lair action again or when the dragon dies.
•  Magical fog billows around one creature the dragon
can see within 120 feet of it. The creature must
succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be
charmed by the dragon until initiative count 20 on
the next round.
Regional Effects
1 The region containing a legendary green dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one
or more of the following effects:
•  Thickets form labyrinthine passages within
1 mile of the dragon's lair. The thickets
act as 10-foot-high, 10-foot-thick walls
that block line of sight. Creatures
can move through the thickets,
with every 1 foot a creature
moves costing it 4 feet of
movement. A "creature in the thibkets must make a DC
15 Dexterity (Saving throw once each round it's in con-
tact with the thickets or take 3 (ld6) piercing damage
from thorns.
Each 10-foot-cube of thickets has AC 5, 30 hit
points, resistance to bludgeoning and piercing dam-
age, vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity to
psychic and thunder damage.
•  Within 1 mile of its lair, the dragon leaves no physical
evidence of its passage unless it wishes to. Tracking it
there is impossible except by magical means. In addi-
tion, it ignores movement impediments and damage
from plants in this area that are neither magical nor
creatures, including the thickets described above. The
plants remove themselves from the dragon's path.
•  Rodents and birds within 1 mile of the dragon's lair
serve as the dragon's eyes and ears. Deer and other
large game are strangely absent, hinting at the pres-
ence of an unnaturally hungry predator.
If the dragon dies, the rodents and birds lose their
supernatural link to it. The thickets remain, but within
ldlO days, they become mundane plants and normal
difficult terrain, losing their thorns.
oe'STBUc^£UOSOFEK<^.
Ancient Red Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 546 (28d20 + 252)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
30 (+10)     10 (+0)     29 (+9)      18 (+4)     15 (+2)      23 (+6)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +16, Wis +9, Cha +13
Skills Perception +16, Stealth +7
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 24 (36,500 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6)
fire damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 17 (2d6+ 10) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft.,
one target. Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) bludgeoning damage
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 90-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 24 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 91 (26d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 25 Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.

i*
98
Adult Red Dragon
Huge dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 256 (19dl2+133)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
27 (+8)      10 (+0)      25 (+7)      16 (+3)      13 (+1)      21 (+5)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +13, Wis +7, Cha +11
Skills Perception +13, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities fire   '
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 23
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then   f
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 60-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 21 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 63 (18d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.

I
_
Young Red Dragon
Large dragon, chaotic evil
I                 ---------------------
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 178 (17dl0+85)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      10 (+0)     21 (+5)      14 (+2)     11 (+0)      19 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +8
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 30-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 17 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
EZ
'  ~- - --'--'        - --'-     -■'      -""i
Red Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon, chaotic €vil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      10 (+0)      17 (+3)       12 (+1)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +5, Wis +2, Cha +4
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ldl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 15-foot I
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 13 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
| half as much damage on a successful one.
'^-      -=■     '   -•---»    ——       -   ■ - ^~ - ' ~
"
Red Dragon
A Red Dragon's Lair
The most covetous of the true dragons, red dragons
tirelessly seek to increase their treasure hoards. They
are exceptionally vain, even for dragons, and their
Conceit is reflected in their proud bearing and their
disdain for other creatures.
The odor of sulfur and pumice surrounds a red
dragon, whose swept-back horns and spinal frill define
its silhouette. Its beaked snout vents smoke at all times,
and its eyes dance with flame when it is angry. Its wings
are the longest of any chromatic dragon, and have a
blue-black tint along the trailing edge that resembles
metal burned blue by fire.
The scales of a red dragon wyrmling are a bright
glossy scarlet, turning a dull, deeper red and becoming
as thick and strong as metal as the dragon ages. Its
pupils also fade as it ages, and the oldest red dragons
have eyes that resemble molten lava orbs.
Mountain Masters. Red dragons prefer mountainous
terrain, badlands, and any other locale where they can
perch high and survey their domain. Their preference
for mountains brings them into conflict with the hill-
dwelling copper dragons from time to time.
Arrogant Tyrants. Red dragons fly into destructive
rages and act on impulse when angered. They are so
ferocious and vengeful that they are regarded as the
archetypical evil dragon by many cultures.
No other dragon comes close to the arrogance of the
red dragon. These creatures see themselves as kings
and emperors, and view the rest of dragonkind as
inferior, Believing that they are chosen by Tiamat to rule
in her name, red dragons consider the world and every
creature in it as theirs to command.
Status and Slaves. Red dragons are fiercely territorial
and isolationist. However, they yearn to know about
events in the wider world, and they make use of lesser
creatures as informants, messengers, and spies. They
are most interested in news about other red dragons,
with which they compete constantly for status.
When it requires servants, a red dragon demands
fealty from chaotic evil humanoids. If allegiance isn't
forthcoming, it slaughters a tribe's leaders and claims
lordship over the survivors. Creatures serving a red
dragon live in constant terror of being roasted and eaten
for displeasing it. They spend most of their time fawning
over the creature in an attempt to stay alive.
Obsessive Collectors. Red dragons value wealth
above all else, and their treasure hoards are legendary.
They covet anything of monetary value, and can often
judge the worth of a bauble to within a copper piece at a
glance. A red dragon has a special affection for treasure
claimed from powerful enemies it has slain, exhibiting
that treasure to prove its superiority.
A red dragon knows the value and provenance of
every item in its hoard, along with each item's exact
location. It might notice the absence of a single coin,
igniting its rage as it tracks down and slays the thief
without mercy. If the thief can't be found, the dragon
goes on a rampage, laying waste to towns and villages in
an attempt to sate its wrath.
Red dragons lair in high mountains or hills, dwelling in
caverns under snow-capped peaks, or within the deep
halls of abandoned mines and dwarven strongholds.
Caves with volcanic or geothermal activity are the most
highly prized red dragon lairs, creating hazards that
hinder intruders and letting searing heat and volcanic
gases wash over a dragon as it sleeps.                . t
With its hoard well protected deep within the lair,
a red dragon spends as much of its time outside the
mountain as in it. For a red dragon, the great heights
of the world are the throne from which it can lq&k!k,
out to survey all it controls—and the wider world^jti
seeks to control.
Throughout the lair complex, servants erect
monuments to the dragon's power, telling the grim story
of its life, the enemies it has slain, and the nations it
has conquered.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects;
the dragon can't use the same effect two rounds in a row:
•  Magma erupts from a point on the ground the dragon
can see within 120 feet of it, creating a 20-foot-high,
5-foot-radius geyser. Each creature in the geyser's
area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, tak-
ing 21 (6d6) fire damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
•  A tremor shakes the lair in a 60-foot radius around
the dragon. Each creature other than the dragon on
the ground in that area must succeed on a DC 15
Dexterity saving throw or be knocked prone.
•  Volcanic gases form a cloud in a 20-foot-radius
sphere centered on a point the dragon can see within
120 feet of it. The sphere spreads around corners,
and its area is lightly obscured. It lasts until initia-
tive count 20 on the next round. Each creature that
starts its turn in the cloud must succeed on a DC 13
Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the end
of its turn. While poisoned in this way, a creature is
incapacitated.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary red dragon's lair is
warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
•  Small earthquakes are common within 6 miles of the
dragon's lair.
•  Water sources within 1 mile of the lair are supernatu-
rally warm and tainted by sulfur.
•  Rocky fissures within 1 mile of the dragon's lair form
portals to the Elemental Plane of Fire, allowing crea-
tures of elemental fire into the world to dwell nearby.
If the dragon dies, these effects fade over the course
of ldlO days.
r      r
==
i

-   ^J*^|'l,--=^3f^''.J'5^'   - »-^S~
___
" '-. - -L-     ■   -
. ^Jbja^.':
^   ■,.       _^m
Ancient White Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 333 (18d20+ 144)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
26 (+8)      10 (+0)      26 (+8)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)      14 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +14, Wis +7, Cha +8
Skills Perception +13, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 23
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 20 (24,500 XP)
Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces
without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult
I terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
I throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
i Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target,
i Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) cold damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in
a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 22
Constitution saving throw, taking 72 (16d8) cold damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
~:
roo
©JU<5,DNS
-I
'},.
■&L',
,=_^^
Adult White Dragon
Huge dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 200 (16dl2+96)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)      10 (+0)     22 (+6)       8 (-1)       12 (+1)      12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex+5, Con +11, Wis+6, Cha+6
Skills Perception +11, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces
without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult
terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
I makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
I Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) cold damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft.j one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in
a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 19
Constitution saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) cold damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
Young White Dragon
Large dragon, chaotic evil
I Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 133 (14dl0 +56)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      10 (+0)      18 (+4)       6 (-2)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +7, Wis +3, Cha +4
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +3
| Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces
without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult
terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) cold damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in
a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15
Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) cold damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
ior
White Dragon
The smallest, least intelligent, and most animalistic of
, the chromatic dragons, white dragons dwell in frigid
climes, favoring arctic areas or icy mountains. They are
';vicious, cruel reptiles driven by hunger and greed.
A white dragon has feral eyes, a sleek profile, and a
spined crest. The scales of a wyrmling white dragon
glisten pure white. As the dragon ages, its sheen
disappears and some of its scales begin to darken,—
so that by the time it is old, it is mottled by patches
of pale blue and light gray. This patterning helps the
dragon blend into the realms of ice and stone in which
it hunts, and to fade from view when it soars across a
cloud-filled sky.
Primal and Vengeful. White dragons lack the
cunning and tactics of most other dragons. However,
their bestial nature makes them the best hunters among
all dragonkind, singularly focused on surviving and
slaughtering their enemies. A white dragon consumes
only food that has been frozen, devouring creatures
killed by its breath weapon while they are still stiff and
frigid. It encases other kills in ice or buries them in
snow near its lair, and finding such a larder is a good
indication that a white dragon dwells nearby.
A white dragon also keeps the bodies of its greatest
enemies as trophies, freezing corpses where it can
look upon them and gloat. The remains of giants,
remorhazes, and other dragons are often positioned
prominently within a white dragon's lair as warnings
to intruders.
Though only moderately intelligent, white dragons
.have extraordinary memories. They recall every slight
"..and defeat, and have been known to conduct malicious
vendettas against creatures that have offended them.
This often includes silver dragons, which lair in
White Dragon Wyrmling
'^Aedium dragon, chaotic evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 32 (5d8+10)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 15 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      10 (+0)      14 (+2)       5 (-3)      10 (+0)      11 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +2
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions
I Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (ld4) cold damage.
Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast of
hail in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a
I DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (5d8) cold damage
I on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
■■      '■-   --       -    - •—                                           i
the same territories as whites. White dragons can
speak as all dragons can, but they rarely talk unless
moved to do so.
Lone Masters. White dragons avoid all other dragons
except whites of the opposite sex. Even then, when
white dragons seek each other out as mates, they stay
together only long enough to conceive offspring before
fleeing into isolation again.
White dragons can't abide rivals near their lairs. As a
result, a white dragon attacks other creatures without
provocation, viewing such creatures as either too weak
or too powerful to live. The only creatures that typically
serve a white dragon are intelligent humanoids that
demonstrate enough strength to assuage the dragon's
wrath, and can put up with sustaining regular losses as
a result of its hunger. This includes dragon-worshiping
kobolds, which are commonly found in their lairs.
Powerful creatures can sometimes gain a white
dragon's obedience through a demonstration of physical
or magical might. Frost giants challenge white dragons
to prove their own strength and improve their status
in their clans, and their cracked bones litter many a
white dragon's lair. However, a white dragon defeated
by a frost giant often becomes its servant, accepting the
mastery of a superior creature in exchange for asserting
its own domination over the other creatures that serve
or oppose the giant.
Treasure Under Ice. White dragons love the cold
sparkle of ice and favor treasure with similar qualities,
particularly diamonds. However, in their remote arctic
climes, the treasure hoards of white dragons more often
contain walrus and mammoth tusk ivory, whale-bone
sculptures, figureheads from ships, furs, and magic
items seized from overly bold adventurers.
Loose coins and gems are spread across a white
dragon's lair, glittering like stars when the light strikes
them. Larger treasures and chests are encased in layers
of rime created by the white dragon's breath, and held
safe beneath layers of transparent ice. The dragon's
great strength allows it to easily access its wealth, while
lesser creatures must spend hours chipping away or
melting the ice to reach the dragon's main hoard.
A white dragon's flawless memory means that it
knows how it came to possess every coin, gem, and
magic item in its hoard, and it associates each item with
a specific victory. White dragons are notoriously difficult
to bribe, since any offers of treasure are seen as an
insult to their ability to simply slay the creature making
the offer and seize the treasure on their own.
A White Dragon's Lair___________
White dragons lair in icy caves and deep subterranean
chambers far from the sun. They favor high mountain
vales accessible only by flying, caverns in cliff faces, and
labyrinthine ice caves in glaciers. White dragons love
vertical heights in their caverns, flying up to the ceiling
to latch on like bats or slithering down icy crevasses.
A legendary white dragon's innate magic deepens
the cold in the area around its lair. Mountain caverns
are fast frozen by the white dragon's presence. A
white dragon can often detect intruders by the way the
keening wind in its lair changes tone.
10?

A white dragon rests on high ice shelves and cliffs in its
lair, the floor around it a treacherous morass of broken
ice and stone, hidden pits, and slippery slopes. As foes
struggle to move toward it, the dragon flies from perch to
perch and destroys them with its freezing breath.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects;
the dragon can't use the same effect two rounds in a row:
•  Freezing fog fills a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on
a point the dragon can see within 120 feet of it. The
fog spreads around corners, and its area is heavily
obscured. Each creature in the fog when it appears
must make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw, taking
10 (3d6) cold damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one. A creature that ends its
turn in the fog takes 10 (3d6) cold damage. A wind of
at least 20 miles per hour disperses the fog. The fog
otherwise lasts until the dragon uses this lair action
again or until the dragon dies.
•  Jagged ice shards fall from the ceiling, striking up to
three creatures underneath that the dragon can see
within 120 feet of it. The dragon makes one ranged
attack roll (+7 to hit) against each target. On a hit, the
target takes 10 (3d6) piercing damage.
•  The .dragon creates an opaque wall of ice on a solid
surface it can see within 120 feet of it. The wall can
be up to 30 feet long, 30 feet high, and 1 foot thick.
When the wall appears, each creature within its area
is pushed 5 feet out of the wall's space) appearing on
whichever side of the wall it wants. Each 10-foot sec-
tion of the wall has AC 5, 30 hit points, vulnerability
to fire damage, and immunity to acid, cold, necrotic,
poison, and psychic damage. The wall disappears
when the dragon uses this lair action again or when
the dragon dies.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary white dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
•  Chilly fog lightly obscures the land within 6 miles of
the dragon's lair.
•  Freezing precipitation falls within 6 miles of the drag-
on's lair, sometimes forming blizzard conditions when
the dragon is at rest.
•  Icy walls block off areas in the dragon's lair. Each wall
is 6 inches thick, and a 10-foot section has AC 5,15 hit
points, vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity to
acid, cold, necrotic, poison, and psychic damage.
If the dragon wishes to move through a wall, it can
do so without slowing down. The portion of the wall
the dragon moves through is destroyed, however.
If the dragon dies, the fog and precipitation fade within
1 day. The ice walls melt over the course of ldlO days.
Metallic Dragons
Metallic dragons seek to preserve and protect, viewing
themselves as one powerful race among the many races
that have a place in the world.
Noble Curiosity. Metallic dragons covet treasure
as do their evil chromatic kin, but they aren't driven
as much by greed in their pursuit of wealth. Rather,
metallic dragons are driven to investigate and collect,
taking unclaimed relics and storing them in their fairs,
A metallic dragon's treasure hoard is filled With items
that reflect its persona, tell its history, and preserve its
memories. Metallic dragons also seek to proteci-'brher
creatures from dangerous magic. As such, pow£)jful.
magic items and even evil artifacts are sometimes"'s
secreted away in a metallic dragon's hoard.
A metallic dragon can be persuaded to part with'an
item in its hoard for the greater good. However, another
creature's need for or right to the item is often unclear
from the dragon's point of view. A metallic dragon must
be bribed or otherwise convinced to part with the item.
Solitary Shapeshifters. At some point in their long
lives, metallic dragons gain the magical ability to
assume the forms of humanoids and beasts. When a
dragon learns how to disguise itself, it might immerse
itself in other cultures for a time. Some dragons are too
shy or paranoid to stray far from their lairs and their
treasure hoards, but bolder dragons love to wander city
streets in humanoid form, taking in the local culture and
cuisine, and amusing themselves by observing how the
smaller races live.
Some metallic dragons prefer to stay as far away from
civilization as possible so as to not attract enemies.
However, this means that they are often far out of touch
with current events.
The Persistence of Memory. Metallic dragons
have long memories, and they form opinions of
humanoids based on previous contact with related
humanoids. Good dragons can recognize humanoid
bloodlines by smell, sniffing out each person they meet
and remembering any relatives they have come into
contact with over the years. A gold dragon might never
suspect duplicity from a cunning villain, assuming
that the villain is of the same mind and heart as a good
and virtuous grandmother. On the other hand, the
dragon might resent a noble paladin whose ancestor
stole a silver statue from the dragon's hoard three
centuries before.
King of Good Dragons. The chief deity of the metallic
dragons is Bahamut, the Platinum Dragon. He dwells in
the Seven Heavens of Mount Celestia, but often wanders
the Material Plane in the magical guise of a venerable
human male in peasant robes. In this form, he is usually
accompanied by seven golden canaries—actually seven
ancient gold dragons in polymorphed form.
Bahamut seldom interferes in the affairs of mortal
creatures, though he makes exceptions to help thwart
the machinations of Tiamat the Dragon Queen and
her evil brood. Good-aligned clerics and paladins
sometimes worship Bahamut for his dedication to
justice and protection. As a lesser god, he has the power*.
to grant divine spells.
3
Ancient Brass Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, chaotic good
----------------------------------------------------------------
I Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
, Hit Points 297 (17d20+119)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
27 (+8)      10 (+0)      25 (+7)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)      19 (+4)
1 Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +13, Wis +8, Cha +10
j Skills History +9, Perception +14, Persuasion +10, Stealth +6
) Damage Immunities fire
j Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 24
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 20 (24,500 XP)
I Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
I throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
I Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
i Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage.
!
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
I Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
' Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
I on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
! minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
] each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons:
Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in an 90-foot line that is
10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 21
Dexterity saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 90-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 21
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes.
This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or
someone uses an action to wake it.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
• In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
-.-.-■■-                                                  -                                                         ■■-..
■MittiTf-ii^TT
t'04

:p&A«$bNS
Adult Brass Dragon
Huge dragon, chaotic good
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 172 (15dl2+75)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      10 (+0)     21 (+5)      14 (+2)      13 (+1)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +10, Wis +6, Cha +8
Skills History +7, Perception +11, Persuasion +8, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in an 60-foot line that is
5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 18
Dexterity saving throw, taking 49 (13d6) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 60-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 18
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes.
This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or
someone uses an action to wake it.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
■*tvmb~ji
:
• ,-a~.^-: ,.^a:   -   ^       >^?~
V   - ■■       —
........ ---—n
Young Brass Dragon
I Large dragon, chaotic good
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 110 (13dl0 +39)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      10 (+0)      17 (+3)       12 (+1)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +8, Wis +5, Cha +7
Skills Perception +10, Persuasion +7, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20
I Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
I'                                     --------------------------------------------
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
' and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 40-foot line that is
5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 14
Dexterity saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 30-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 14
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 5 minutes.
This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or
someone uses an action to wake it.
,•
. -_*__________
-■^■■Mfegli
rWffSJteK'l
10$

Brass Dragon
The most gregarious of the true dragons, brass dragons
crave conversation, sunlight, and hot, dry climates.
A brass dragon's head is denned by the broad
•protective plate that expands from its forehead and the
spikes protruding from its chin. A frill runs the length of
its neck, and its tapering wings extend down the length
of its tail. A brass dragon wyrmling's scales are a dull,
- mottled brown. As it ages, the dragon's scales begin to -
shine, eventually taking on a warm, burnished luster.
Its wings and frills are mottled green toward the edges,
darkening with age. As a brass dragon grows older, its
pupils fade until its eyes resemble molten metal orbs.
Boldly Talkative. A brass dragon engages in
conversations with thousands of creatures throughout
its long life, accumulating useful information which it
will gladly share for gifts of treasure. If an intelligent
creature tries to leave a brass dragon's presence without
engaging in conversation, the dragon follows it. If the
creature attempts to escape by magic or force, the
dragon might respond with a fit of pique, using its sleep
gas to incapacitate the creature. When it wakes, the
creature finds itself pinned to the ground by giant claws
or buried up to its neck in the sand while the dragon's
thirst for small talk is slaked.
A brass dragon is trusting of creatures that appear
to enjoy conversation as much as it does, but is smart
enough to know when it is being manipulated. When
j Brass £)ragon Wyrmling
I 'Medium dragon) chaotic good
I Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 16 (3d8+3)
j Speed 30 ft., burrow 15 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)      13 (+1)
J Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
J Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2
■ Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
I Languages Draconic
] Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Actions
1 Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
9 following breath weapons.
,   Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in an 20-foot line that is
5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 11
Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 15-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 11
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 1 minute.
-This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or
someone uses an action to wake it.
that happens, the dragon often responds in kind,
treating a bout of mutual trickery as a game.
Prized Treasures. Brass dragons covet magic
items that allow them to converse with interesting
personalities. An intelligent telepathic weapon or a
magic lamp with a djinni bound inside it are among the
greatest treasures a brass dragon can possess.
Brass dragons conceal their hoards under mounds
of sand or in secret places far from their primary
lairs. They have no trouble remembering where their
treasure is buried, and therefore have no need for maps.
Adventurers and wanderers should be wary if they
happen across a chest hidden in an oasis or a treasure
cache tucked away in a half-buried desert ruin, for these
might be parts of a brass dragon's hoard.
A Brass Dragon's Lair____________
A brass dragon's desert lair is typically a ruin, canyon,
or cave network with ceiling holes to allow for sunlight.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects:
•  A strong wind blows around the dragon. Each creature
within 60 feet of the dragon must succeed on a DC 15
Strength saving throw or be pushed 15 feet away from
the dragon and knocked prone. Gases and vapors are
dispersed by the wind, and unprotected flames are
extinguished. Protected flames, such as lanterns, have
a 50 percent chance of being extinguished.
•  A cloud of sand swirls about in a 20-foot-radius sphere
centered on a point the dragon can see within 120
feet of it. The cloud spreads around corners. Each
creature in it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute. A creature
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary brass dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
•   Tracks appear in the sand within 6 miles of the drag-
on's lair. The tracks lead to safe shelters and hidden
water sources, while also leading away from areas
that the dragon prefers to remain undisturbed.
•   Images of Large or smaller monsters haunt the des-
ert sands within 1 mile of the dragon's lair. These
illusions move and appear real, although they can do
no harm. A creature that examines an image from a
distance can tell it's an illusion with a successful DC
20 Intelligence (Investigation) check. Any physical
interaction with an image reveals it to be an illusion,
because objects pass through it.
•   Whenever a creature with an Intelligence of 3 or
higher comes within 30 feet of a water source within 1
mile of the dragon's lair, the dragon becomes aware of
the creature's presence and location.
If the dragon dies, the tracks fade in ldlO days, but the
other effects fade immediately.
ro6
©SA&ONS
r
Ancient Bronze Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, lawful good
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
, Hit Points 444 (24d20+192)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
29 (+9)      10 (+0)     27 (+8)      18 (+4)     17 (+3)      21 (+5)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +15, Wis +10, Cha +12
Skills Insight+10, Perception +17, Stealth +7
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 22 (30,000 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
1 Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach IS ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (2dl0 + 9) piercing damage.
, Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2d6 + 9) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
I Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
! is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
1 on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
I minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
I each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
I creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 120-foot
line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make
a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw, taking 88 (16dl0) lightning
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a
DC 23 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
pushed 60 feet away from the dragon.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions___________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 24 Dexterity saving throw or take 16 (2d6 + 9)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
■;
^---U**L—■-     -    ■     -              ■    -    '     — ........-JrfBTS

107

Adult Bronze Dragon
Huge dragon, lawful good
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 212 (17dl2+102)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
25 (+7)      10 (+0)     23 (+6)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)      19 (+4)
f Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +11, Wis +7, Cha +9
Skills Insight +7, Perception +12, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
| Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (2dl0 + 7) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2d8+ 7) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
I is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
J creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 90-foot
line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make
a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw, taking 66 (12dl0) lightning
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a
DC 19 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
pushed 60 feet away from the dragon.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d6 + 7)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
c
- ■-      '           '                     ■          -.'■■■-«
Young Bronze Dragon
Large dragon, lawful good
*«s™
tw.ifc.ai.--..
Actions
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 142 (15dl0 +60)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)      10 (+0)     19 (+4)      14 (+2)     13 (+1)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +7, Wis +4, Cha +6
Skills Insight +4, Perception +7, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Common, Draconic
| Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
'' - >
*  ' lr" \       -
~»--a-uj^ iwy^.A1
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.   .
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2dl0+ 5) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 60-foot
line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 55 (lOdlO) lightning
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a
DC 15 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
pushed 40 feet away from the dragon.
-■      . Z
f08
RRAdJPNS
Bronze Dragon
Bronze dragons are coastal dwellers that feed primarily
on aquatic plants and fish. They take the forms of
friendly animals to observe other creatures of interest.
They are also fascinated by warfare and eagerly join
armies fighting for a just cause.
A ribbed and fluted crest defines the shape of a bronze
dragon's head. Curving horns extend out from the crest,
echoed by spines on its lower jaw and chin. To help them
swim, bronze dragons have webbed feet and smooth
scales. A bronze wyrmling's scales are yellow tinged
with green; only as the dragon approaches adulthood
does its color deepen to a darker, rich bronze tone. The
pupils of a bronze dragon's eyes fade as the dragon ages,
until they resemble glowing green orbs.
Dragons of the Coast. Bronze dragons love to
watch ships traveling up and down the coastlines near
their lairs, sometimes taking the forms of dolphins or
seagulls to inspect those ships and their crews more
closely. A daring bronze dragon might slip aboard a
ship in the guise of a bird or rat, inspecting the hold
for treasure. If the dragon finds a worthy addition to its
hoard, it barters with the ship's captain for the item.
War Machines. Bronze dragons actively oppose
tyranny, and many bronze dragons yearn to test their
mettle by putting their size and strength to good use.
When a conflict unfolds near its lair, a bronze dragon
ascertains the underlying cause, then offers its services
to any side that fights for good. Once a bronze dragon
commits to a cause, it remains a staunch ally.
Well-Organized Wealth. Bronze dragons loot sunken
ships and also collect colorful coral and pearls from
the reefs and seabeds near their lairs. When a bronze
I               dragon pledges to help an army wage war against
tyranny, it asks for nominal payment. If such a request
is beyond its allies' means, it might settle for a collection
of old books on military history or a ceremonial item
commemorating the alliance. A bronze dragon might
also lay claim to a treasure held by the enemy that it
feels would be safer under its protection.
A Bronze Dragon's Lair_________
A bronze dragon lairs in coastal caves. It might salvage
a wrecked ship, reconstruct it within the confines of its
lair, and use it as a treasure vault or nest for its eggs.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects:
• The dragon creates fog as though it had cast the fog
I          cloud spell. The fog lasts until initiative count 20 on
the next round.
■ A thunderclap originates at a point the dragon can see
within 120 feet of it. Each creature within a 20-foot
radius centered on that point must make a DC 15
Constitution saving throw or take 5 (ldlO) thunder
damage and be deafened until the end of its next turn.
R
Tl
:
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary bronze dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic.
Bronze Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon, lawful good
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 32 (5d8 + 10)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      10 (+0)      15 (+2)      12 (+1)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +4
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2
Damage Immunities lightning
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ldlO + 3) piercing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 40-foot line
that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC
12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 16 (3dl0) lightning damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a
DC 12 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
pushed 30 feet away from the dragon.
•  Once per day, the dragon can alter the weather in a
6-mile radius centered on its lair. The dragon doesn't
need to be outdoors; otherwise the effect is identical to
the control weather spell.
•  Underwater plants within 6 miles of the dragon's lair
take on dazzlingly brilliant hues.
•  Within its lair, the dragon can set illusory sounds,
such as soft music and strange echoes, so that they
can be heard in various parts of the lair.
If the dragon dies, changed weather reverts to normal,
as described in the spell, and the other effects fade
in Id 10 days.

109
Ancient Copper Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, chaotic good
Armor Class 21 (natural armor)
Hit Points 350 (20d20 + 140)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIS
CHA
27 (+8)      12 (+1)      25 (+7)      20 (+5)     17 (+3)      19 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +14, Wis +10, Cha +11
Skills Deception +11, Perception +17, Stealth +8
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft,, passive Perception
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 21 (27,500 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
27
Actfjiisrs
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
s within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 90-foot line that is
10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 22
Dexterity saving throw, taking 63 (14d8) acid damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 90-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 22 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can't use
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can't make more than
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself with a successful save.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or   j
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________j
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
IIO
P.itA(5£>NS
X
V
__^
Adult Copper Dragon
Huge dragon, chaotic good
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 184 (16dl2 +80)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      12 (+1)      21 (+5)      18 (+4)     15 (+2)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +10, Wis +7, Cha +8
Skills Deception +8, Perception +12, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 60-foot line that
is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 18
Dexterity saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) acid damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 60-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can't use
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can't make more than
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself with a successful save.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can   |
then fly up to half its flying speed.
te


>*^ "-^-


■"^ife.
S5S
Young Copper Dragon
Large dragon, chaotic good
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 119 (14dl0 +42)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      12 (+1)      17 (+3)      16 (+3)     13 (+1)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +4, Cha +5
Skills Deception +5, Perception +7, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
. and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 40-foot line that
is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 14
Dexterity saving throw, taking 40 (9d8) acid damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 30-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can't use
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can't make more than
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself with a successful save.
■ '^^-^—a-'   -fchdtos^-1
■~UfaC~U.«4lgv^,   .j.   ~
---~
.-^■^fe^a
Copper Dragon
Copper dragons are incorrigible pranksters, joke tellers,
and riddlers that live in hills and rocky uplands. Despite
their gregarious and even-tempered natures, they
possess a covetous, miserly streak, and can become
dangerous when their hoards are threatened.
A copper dragon has brow plates jutting over its eyes,
extending back to long horns that grow as a series
of overlapping segments. Its backswept cheek ridges
and jaw frills give it a pensive look. At birth, a copper
dragon's scales are a ruddy brown with a metallic tint.
As the dragon ages, its scales become more coppery in
color, later taking on a green tint as it ages. A copper
dragon's pupils fade with age, and the eyes of the oldest
copper dragons resemble glowing turquoise orbs.
Good Hosts. A copper dragon appreciates wit, a
good joke, humorous story, or riddle. A copper dragon
becomes annoyed with any creature that doesn't laugh
at its jokes or accept its tricks with good humor.
Copper dragons are particularly fond of bards. A
dragon might carve out part of its lair as a temporary
abode for a bard willing to regale it with stories, riddles,
and music. To a copper dragon, such companionship is a
treasure to be coveted.
Copper Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon ^chaotic good
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)     11 (+0)      13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities acid
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 20-foot line that
is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 11
Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) acid damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 15-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can't use
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can't make more than
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself with a successful save.
Cautious and Crafty. When building its'hoard, a
copper dragon prefers treasures from the earth. Metals
and precious stones are favorites of these creatures.
A copper dragon is wary when it comes to showing off
its possessions. If it knows that other creatures seek a
specific item in its hoard, a copper dragon will not admit
to possessing the item. Instead, it might send curious
treasure hunters on a wild goose chase to search for the
object while it watches from afar for its own pleasure.
A Copper Dragon's Lair__________
Copper dragons dwell in dry uplands and on hilltops,
where they make their lairs in narrow caves. False
walls in the lair hide secret antechambers where the
dragon stores valuable ores, art objects, and other
oddities it has collected over its lifetime. Worthless
items are put on display in open caves to tantalize
treasure seekers and distract them from where the real
treasure is hidden.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects:
•  The dragon chooses a point on the ground that it can
see within 120 feet of it. Stone spikes sprout from the
ground in a 20-foot radius centered on that point. The
effect is otherwise identical to the spike growth spell
and lasts until the dragon uses this lair action again or
until the dragon dies.
•  The dragon chooses a 10-foot-square area on the
ground that it can see within 120 feet of it. The ground
in that area turns into 3-foot-deep mud. Each creature
on the ground in that area when the mud appears
must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or
sink into the mud and become restrained. A creature
can take an action to attempt a DC 15 Strength check,
freeing itself or another creature within its reach and
ending the restrained condition on a success. Moving
1 foot in the mud costs 2 feet of movement. On initia-
tive count 20 on the next round, the mud hardens, and
the Strength DC to work free increases to 20.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary copper dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects:
•  Magic carvings of the dragon's smiling visage can be
seen worked into stone terrain and objects within 6
miles of the dragon's lair.
•  Tiny beasts such as rodents and birds that are nor-
mally unable to speak gain the magical ability to
speak and understand Draconic while within 1 mile
of the dragon's lair. These creatures speak well of the
dragon, but can't divulge its whereabouts.
•  Intelligent creatures within 1 mile of the dragon's lair
are prone to fits of giggling. Even serious matters sud-
denly seem amusing.
If the dragon dies, the magic carvings fade over the
course of ldlO days. The other effects end immediately.
112
pjjlft<$WS
—~
Ancient Gold Dragon
I Gargantuan dragon, lawful good
'-
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 546 (28d20 + 252)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX
30 (+10)     14 (+2)
CON
29 (+9)
INT          WIS
18 (+4)     17 (+3)
CHA
28 (+9)
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +16, Wis +10, Cha +16
Skills Insight+10, Perception +17, Persuasion +16, Stealth +9
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27
Languages Common, Draconic
J Challenge 24 (36,500 XP)
D Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
I Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
I Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
I Hit: 17 (2d6+ 10) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
I Hit: 19 (2d8+ 10) bludgeoning damage.
I Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 24 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
I minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
I creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
I following breath weapons.
I Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 90-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must make a DC 24 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 71 (13dl0) fire damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 90-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 24 Strength
saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack
rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
I Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 25 Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
I.HOl:i
"3
Gold Dragon
The most powerful and majestic of the metallic dragons,
gold dragons are dedicated foes of evil.
A gold dragon has a sagacious face anointed with
flexible spines that resemble whiskers. Its horns sweep
back from its nose and brow, echoing twin frills that
adorn its long neck. A gold dragon's sail-like wings start
at its shoulders and trace down to the tip of its tail, letting
-it fly with a distinctive rippling motion as if swimming
through the air. A gold dragon wyrmling has scales
of dark yellow with metallic flecks. Those flecks grow
larger as the dragon matures. As a gold dragon ages, its
pupils fade until its eyes resemble pools of molten gold.
Devourer of Wealth. Gold dragons can eat just about
anything, but their preferred diet consists of pearls and
gems. Thankfully, a gold dragon doesn't need to gorge
itself on such wealth to feel satisfied. Gifts of treasure
that it can consume are well received by a gold dragon,
as long as they aren't bribes.
Reserved Shapeshifters. Gold dragons are respected
by the other metallic dragons for their wisdom and
fairness, but they are the most alobT'and grim of the
good-aligned dragons. They value their privacy to the
extent that they rarely fraternize with other dragons
except their own mates and offspring.
Older gold dragons can assume animal and humanoid
forms. Rarely does a gold dragon in disguise reveal its
true form. In the guise of a peddler, it might regularly
visit a town to catch up on local gossip, patronize honest
businesses, and lend a helping hand in unseen ways. In
the guise of an animal, the dragon might befriend a lost
child, a wandering minstrel, or an innkeeper, serving as
a companion for days or weeks on end.
Master Hoarders. A gold dragon keeps its hoard in
a well-guarded vault deep within its lair. Magical wards
placed on the vault make it all but impossible to remove
any treasures without the dragon knowing about it.
A Gold Dragon's Lair____________
Gold dragons make their homes in out-of-the-way
places, where they can do as they please without
arousing suspicion or fear. Most dwell near idyllic lakes
WW
[ Adult Gold Dragon
Huge dragon, lawful good
i Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 256 (19dl2+133)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
27 (+8)      14 (+2)      25 (+7)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)      24 (+7)
J Saving Throws Dex+8, Con+13, Wis+8, Cha+13
i Skills Insight +8, Perception +14, Persuasion +13, Stealth +8
\ Damage Immunities fire
,' Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 24
'M Languages Common, Draconic
I Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
I Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
] throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
I Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 60-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must make a DC 21 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 66 (12dl0) fire damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 60-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 21 Strength
saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack
rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
C2Z
-       " --•    • iiw
I.X4
SONS
.aridfivers, mist-shrouded islands, cave complexes
hidden behind sparkling waterfalls, or ancient ruins.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects;
the dragon can't use the same effect two rounds in a row:
•   The dragon glimpses the future, so it has advantage
on attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws until
initiative count 20 on the next round.
•   One creature the dragon can see within 120 feet of it
must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or
be banished to a dream plane, a different plane of exis-
tence the dragon has imagined into being. To escape,
the creature must use its action to make a Charisma
check contested by the dragon's. If the creature wins,
ifcescapes the dream plane. Otherwise, the effect
ends on initiative count 20 on the next round. When
the effect ends, the creature reappears in the space
it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that one
is occupied.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary gold dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one of
more of the following effects:
•  Whenever a creature that can understand a language
sleeps or enters a state of trance or reverie within 6
miles of the dragon's lair, the dragon can establish
telepathic contact with that creature and converse
with it in its dreams. The creature remembers its con-
versation with the dragon upon waking.
•   Banks of beautiful, opalescent mist manifest within -
6 miles of the dragon's lair. The mist doesn't ,8bscui;e
anything. It assumes haunting forms when eyiljCfea^
tures are near the dragon or other non-evil creatiires
in the mist, warning such creatures of the danger?
•   Gems and pearls within 1 mile of the dragon's
lair sparkle and gleam, shedding dim light in a
5-foot radius.
If the dragon dies, these effects end immediately.
■ -'  '             - '    -     -       -—*
Young Gold Dragon
Large dragon, lawful good'
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 178 (17dl0 +85)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      14 (+2)     21 (+5)      16 (+3)     13 (+1)     20 (+5)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +9, Wis +5, Cha +9
Skills Insight +5, Perception +9, Persuasion +9, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 30-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must make a DC 17 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 55 (lOdlO) fire damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 30-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 17 Strength
saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack
rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Gold Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon, lawful good
■■——iwp————    i                       —i-----------------------
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 60 (8d8 + 24)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      14 (+2)      17 (+3)       14 (+2)     11 (+0)      16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +2, Cha +5
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities fire
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ldlO + 4) piercing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 15-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 22 (4dl0) fire damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 15-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 13 Strength
saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack
rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.

L
JBBSm
DUAGOWJ
"5
Ancient Silver Dragon
Gargantuan dragon, lawful good
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 487 (25d20 + 225)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
30 (+10)     10 (+0)     29 (+9)      18 (+4)     15 (+2)      23 (+6)
Saving Throws Dex+7, Con +16, Wis +9, Cha +13
Skills Arcana+11, History+11, Perception +16, Stealth+7
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 23 (32,500 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d6 + 10) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2d8+ 10) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 90-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must make a DC 24 Constitution
saving throw, taking 67 (15d8) cold damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 90-
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC
24 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as ,
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or   I
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 25 Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d 6 + 10)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can   '•
then fly up to half its flying speed.
-   ■   ... ■- ■ _ l    ■.      ■. 'i
«6
r&a$5n-s
ilver Dragon
jV      I,------------——                  T)<   ,T
-M-
The friendliest and most social of the metallic dragons,
silver dragons cheerfully assist good creatures in need.
A silver dragon shimmers as if sculpted from pure
metal, its face given a noble cast by its high eyes and
sweeping beard-like chin spikes. A spiny frill rises high
over its head, tracing down its neck to the tip of its tail.
A silver wyrmling's scales are blue-gray with silver
highlights. As the dragon approaches adulthood, its
color gradually brightens until its individual scales are
barely visible. As a silver dragon grows older, its pupils
fade until its eyes resemble orbs of mercury.
Dragons of Virtue. Silver dragons believe that living
a moral life involves doing good deeds and ensuring
that one's actions cause no undeserved harm to other
sentient beings. They don't take it upon themselves to
root out evil, as gold and bronze dragons do, but they
will gladly oppose creatures that dare to commit evil
acts or harm the innocent.
Friends of the Small Races. Silver dragons enjoy
the company of other silver dragons. Their only true
Adult Silver Dragon
Huge dragon, lawful good
I Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 243 (18dl2+126)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR
27 (+8)
DEX         CON
10 (+0)     25 (+7)
INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      13 (+1)      21 (+5)
Saving Throws Dex+5, Con +12, Wis +6, Cha +10
Skills Arcana +8, History +8, Perception +11, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21
! Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 16(15,000 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
| Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed
on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
i ,- ^j tej
--.-■■--    -   - -. -       -       ----  -
friendships outside their own kin arise in the company
of humanoids, and many silver dragons spend as much
time in humanoid form as they do in draconic form, A
silver dragon adopts a benign humanoid persona such
as a kindly old sage or a young wanderer, and it often
has mortal companions with whom it develops strong
friendships.
Silver dragons must step away from their humanoid
lives on a regular basis, returning to theif'true forms
to mate and rear offspring, or to tend to their hoards
and personal affairs. Because many lose track of time
while away, they sometimes return to find that their
companions have grown old or died. Silver dragorts
often end up befriending several generations of
humanoids within a single family as a result.
Respect for Humanity. Silver dragons befriend
humanoids of all races, but shorter-lived races such as
humans spark their curiosity in a way the longer-lived
elves and dwarves don't. Humans have a drive and zest
for life that silver dragons find fascinating.
Hoarding History. Silver dragons love to possess
relics of humanoid history. This includes the great
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 60-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must make a DC 20 Constitution
saving throw, taking 58 (13d8) cold damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 60-
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC
20 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice).
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points,
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance,
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or
legendary actions of that form.
Legendary Actions____________________
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check.
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings.
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed
on a DC 21 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8)
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can
then fly up to half its flying speed.
. ■~Be.-.i»w^ ■*.-■
liK.V .
"7
piles of coins they covet, minted by current and fallen
humanoid empires, as well as art objects and fine
:v jfewelry crafted by numerous races. Other treasures
>v- tn'at make up their hoards can include intact ships, the
remains of kings and queens, thrones, the crown jewels
of ancient empires, inventions and contraptions, and
'  monoliths carried from the ruins of fallen cities.
A,Silver Dragon's Lair__________
Silver dragons dwell among the clouds, making
their lairs on secluded cold mountain peaks. Though
many are comfortable in natural cavern complexes or
abandoned mines, silver dragons covet the lost outposts
of humanoid civilization. An abandoned mountaintop
citadel or a remote tower raised by a. long-dead wizard is
the sort of lair that every silver dragon dreams of.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects:
• The dragon creates fog as if it had cast the fog
cloud spell. The fog lasts until initiative count 20 on
the next round.
'                 ..-■-..          .     ■*■..■-■...■«■ ,--■
Young Silver Dragon
Large dragon, lawful good
J Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 168 (16d10 +80)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
23 (+6)      10 (+0)     21 (+5)
INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)     11 (+0)      19 (+4)
Actions
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 30-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must make a DC 17 Constitution
saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) cold damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 30-
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC
17 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +8
Skills Arcana +6, History +6, Perception +8, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
•  A blisteringly cold wind blows through the lair near
the dragon. Each creature within 120 feet of the
dragon must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving
throw or take 5 (ldlO) cold damage. Gases and vapors
are dispersed by the wind, and unprotected flames are
extinguished. Protected flames, such as lanterns, have
a 50 percent chance of being extinguished.
Regional Effects
The region containing a legendary silver dragon's lair
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or
more of the following effects.
•  Once per day, the dragon can alter the weather in a
6-mile radius centered on its lair. The dragon doesn't
need to be outdoors; otherwise the effect is identical to
the control weather spell.
•  Within 1 mile of the lair, winds buoy non-evil creatures
that fall due to no act of the dragon's or its allies. Such
creatures descend at a rate of 60 feet per round and
take no falling damage.
•  Given days or longer to work, the dragon can make
clouds and fog within its lair as solid as stone, forming
structures and other objects as it wishes.
If the dragon dies, changed weather reverts to normal,
as described in the spell, and the other effects fade
in ldlO days.
Silver Dragon Wyrmling
Medium dragon,Jawful good
< ArTrt'or'Class'17. (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6d8+18)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR
19 (+4)
DEX         CON
10 (+0)      17 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
j Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +5, Wis +2, Cha +4
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2
Damage Immunities cold
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ldlO + 4) piercing damage.
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons.
Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 15-foot cone.
Each creature in that area must make a DC 13 Constitution
saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) cold damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 15-
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC
13 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
j
m
UKAGON.H
r~' ' - - ■             --     -   - ■ ~^
Draqon Turtle
Gargantuan dragon, neutral
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 341 (22d20+110)
Speed 20 ft"., swim 40 ft.
STR
25 (+7)
DEX
10 (+0)
CON
20 (+5)
INT          WIS
10 (+0)     12 (+1)
| Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +10, Wis +6
j Damage Resistances fire
j Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Aquan, Draconic
Challenge 17(18,000 XP)
Amphibious. The dragon turtle can breathe air and water.
Actions_____________________________
.j Multiattack. The dragon turtle makes three attacks: one with
I its bite and two with its claws. It can make one tail attack in
i place of its two claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
j Hit: 26 (3dl2 + 7) piercing damage.
j Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) slashing damage.
)  Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
|  Hit: 26 (3dl2 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
i  creature, it must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw
'  or be pushed up to 10 feet away from the dragon turtle and
I  knocked prone.
Steam Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon turtle exhales
scalding steam in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area
must make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 52 (15d6)
j fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
! successful one. Being underwater doesn't grant resistance
against this damage.
1'-^:     .-"■■---
Dragon Turtle
Dragon turtles are among the most fearsome creatures
of the oceans. As large and voracious as the oldest of its
land-based dragon kin, a dragon turtle strikes with its
deadly jaws, steaming breath, and crushing tail.
A dragon turtle's rough shell is the same dark green
color as the deep water where this monster dwells.
Silver highlights lining the shell resemble light
dancing on open water, and a surfacing dragon turtle
is sometimes mistaken for the reflection of the sun or
moon on the waves.
Dragons of the Deep. Like true dragons, dragon
turtles collect treasure, first by sinking ships and then
by sifting through the wreckage for coins and other
precious items. A dragon turtle swallows treasure for
transport, then regurgitates it when it reaches its lair.
Dragon turtles dwell in caves hidden in coral reefs
•or beneath the seafloor, or along rugged stretches
of coastline. If a choice cave is already inhabited, a
dragon turtle attacks its current residents in an attempt
to take over.
Mercenary Monsters. A dragon turtle is smart
enough to be bribed, and pirates sailing seas patrolled
by these creatures quickly learn to offer them treasure
in exchange for safe passage. Clever sahuagin
sometimes ally with dragon turtles, enticing them
with treasure to use their blistering breath weapons in
sahuagin raids against ships and coastal settlements.
Elemental Might. Dragon turtles sometimes find their
way through sunken planar rifts to the Elemental Plane
of Water. Those monstrous specimens can often be
found in the service of marids, which strap magnificent
coral thrones to the backs of dragon turtles and ride
them as mounts.
H9
■.--"-—iTr-"--«
Drider
Lprge monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 123 (13dl0 + 52)
I Speed 30 ft,, climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      16 (+3)      18 (+4)      13 (+1)     14 (+2)      12 (+1)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +9
Senses dark vis ion 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
i Fey Ancestry. The drider has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can't put the drider to sleep.
Innate Spellcasting. The drider's innate spellcasting ability is
I Wisdom (spell save DC 13). The drider can innately cast the
I following spells, requiring no material components:
1 At will: dancing lights
■ 1/day each: darkness, faerie fire
Spider Climb. The drider can climb difficult surfaces, including
< upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
I Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drider has
I disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
I (Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Web Walker. The drider ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Actions
Multiattack. The drider makes three attacks, either with its
longsword or its longbow. It can replace one of those attacks
with a bite attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
J Hit: 2 (ld4) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) poison damage.
I Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (ldlO + 3)
slashing damage if used with two hands.
i Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 120/600
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8)
poison damage.
Drider
When a drow shows great promise, Lolth summons it
to the Demonweb Pits for a test of faith and strength.
Those that pass the test rise higher in the Spider
Queen's favor. Those that fail are transformed into
driders—a horrid hybrid of a drow and a giant spider
that serves as a living reminder of Lolth's power. Only
drow can be turned into driders, and the power to create
these creatures resides with Lolth alone.
Scarred for Life. Drow transformed into driders
return to the Material Plane as twisted and debased
creatures. Driven by madness, they disappear into
the Underdark to become hermits and hunters, either
wandering alone or leading packs of giant spiders.
On rare occasion, a drider returns to the fringes of
drow society despite its curse, most often to fulfill some
longstanding vow or vendetta from its former life. Drow
fear and shun the driders, holding them in lower esteem
than slaves. However, they tolerate the presence of.
these creatures as living representatives of Lolth's will,
and a reminder of the fate that awaits all who fail the
Spider Queen.
A______________________________________________k.
Variant: Drider Spellcasting
Driders that were once drow spellcasters might retain their
ability to cast spells. Such driders typically have a higher
spellcasting ability (15 or 16) than other driders. Further, the
drider gains the Spellcasting trait. A drider that was a drow
divine spellcaster, therefore, could have a Wisdom of 16 (+3)
and a Spellcasting trait as follows.
Spellcasting. The drider is a 7th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to
hit with spell attacks). The drider has the following spells
prepared from the cleric spell list:
Cantrips (at will): poison spray, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): bane, detect magic, sanctuary
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, silence
3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, dispel magic
4th level (2 slots): divination, freedom of movement

120
toqifljiS
t:
«tt'
Dryad
Travelers entering a forest might catch a glimpse of a
feminine form flitting through the trees. Warm laughter
hangs on the air, drawing those who hear it deeper into
the emerald shadows.
Treebound. Powerful fey will sometimes bind lesser
fey spirits to trees, transforming them into dryads. This
is sometimes done as a punishment when the fey spirit
falls in love with a mortal and that love is forbidden.
A dryad can emerge from the tree and travel the lands
around it, but the tree remains her home and roots her
to the world. As long as the tree remains healthy and
unharmed, the dryad stays forever youthful and alluring.
If the tree is harmed, she suffers. If the tree is ever
destroyed, the dryad descends into madness.
Reclusive Fey. Dryads act as guardians of their
woodland demesnes. Shy and reclusive, they watch
interlopers from the trees. A dryad struck by the beauty
of a stranger might investigate more closely, perhaps
even try to lure the individual away to be charmed.
Dryads work with other sylvan creatures to defend
their forests. Unicorns, treants, and satyrs live alongside
them, in addition to druids that share the dryads'
devotion to the woods they call home.
Woodland Magic. Dryads can speak with plants and
animals. They can teleport from one tree to another,
luring interlopers away from their groves. If pressed, a
dryad can beguile humanoids with her enchantments,
turning enemies into friends. They also know a handful
of useful spells.
,.,,                              ,.       ..   .
Dryad
Medium fey, neutral
Armor Class 11 (16 with barkskin)
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      12 (+1)      11 (+0)      14 (+2)      15 (+2)      18 (+4)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
1 Languages Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The dryad's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The dryad can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: druidcraft
' 3/day each: entangle, goodberry
1/day each: barkskin, pass without trace, shillelagh
Magic Resistance. The dryad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Speak with Beasts and Plants. The dryad can communicate
I with beasts and plants as if they shared a language.
> aattrfce-oip?
Tree Stride. Once on her turn, the dryad can use 10 feet of her
movement to step magically into one living tree within her
reach and emerge from a second living tree within 60 feet of
the first tree, appearing in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of
the second tree. Both trees must be Large or bigger.
Actions
Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit (+6 to hit with shillelagh),
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage, or 8
(IdS + 4) bludgeoning damage with shillelagh.
Fey Charm. The dryad targets one humanoid or beast that she
can see within 30 feet of her. Ifthe target can see the dryad, it
must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be magically
charmed. The charmed creature regards the dryad as a trusted
friend to be heeded and protected. Although the target isn't
under the dryad's control, it takes the dryad's requests or
actions in the most favorable way it can.
Each time the dryad or its allies do anything harmful to the
target, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect on itself
on a success. Otherwise, the effect lasts 24 hours or until the
dryad dies, is on a different plane of existence from the target,
or ends the effect as a bonus action. If a target's saving throw
is successful, the target is immune to the dryad's Fey Charm
for the next 24 hours.
The dryad can have no more than one humanoid and up to
three beasts charmed at a time.
f

^^1
Jfc-lV^ - ~
'■■"'■   *-t^~-~-:
"
I«I
=3
*■
Duergar
The tyrannical duergar, also known as gray dwarves,
dwell in fantastic cities deep in the Underdark. Using
ancient dwarven knowledge and myriad slaves, they
work tirelessly to expand their subterranean kingdoms.
Most duergar (including females) are bald and have
ashen gray skin. They wear drab clothing designed
10 blend in with stone, along with simple jewelry that
reflects their severe and utilitarian demeanor.
Slaves to Slavers. The duergar were once dwarves,
before their greed and endless delving beneath the earth
brought them into contact with the mind flayers. Held
in captivity for generations by the illithids, the dwarves
eventually won their independence with the aid of the
evil god Laduguer. Slavery had forever changed them,
however, darkening their spirits to make the duergar as
evil as the tyrants they had escaped. Despite winning
their freedom, duergar are dour, pessimistic, untrusting
creatures, always toiling and complaining, with no
memory of what it means to be happy or proud. Their
craftsmanship and accomplishments endure, yet they
are bereft of warmth or artistry.
Duergar make war against their dwarven kin and all
other subterranean races. They forge alliances when
it is convenient, then break those alliances when they
have nothing more to gain. They take and hold slaves to
toil in the Underdark, regarding them as free labor and
crude currency.
Tough as Stone. Like dwarves, duergar have strong
constitutions. Adding to their physical stamina is an
incredible mental fortitude resulting from their time as
slaves of the illithids. A duergar's mind is a fortress, able
to shrug off charms, illusions, and other spells.
Born of Darkness. The Underdark is saturated with
strange magical power, which the duergar absorbed
~ov6r generations of imprisonment. A duergar can
Duergar
Medium huthanoid (dwarf), lau/fultvil
Armor Class 16 (scale mail, shield)
Hit Points 26 (4d8 + 8)
Speed 25 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      11 (+0)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)     10 (+0)      9 (-1)
Damage Resistances poison
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Dwarvish, Undercommon
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Duergar Resilience. The duergar has advantage on saving
throws against poison, spells, and illusions, as well as to resist
being charmed or paralyzed.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the duergar has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Enlarge (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 minute,
the duergar magically increases in size, along with anything it
is wearing or carrying. While enlarged, the duergar is Large,
doubles its damage dice on Strength-based weapon attacks
(included in the attacks), and makes Strength checks and
Strength saving throws with advantage. If the duergar lacks the
room to become Large, it attains the maximum size possible in
the space available.
War Pick. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage, or 11 (2d8 + 2)
piercing damage while enlarged.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage,
or 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage while enlarged.
Invisibility (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The duergar
magically turns invisible until it attacks, casts a spell, or uses
its Enlarge, or until its concentration is broken, up to 1 hour (as
if concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the duergar wears
or carries is invisible with it.
increase its size and strength for a short time, becoming
a powerful ogre-sized warrior. If it faces a foe it can't
fight, or when spying on creatures approaching its
territory, it can just as easily become invisible to slip
away into the darkness.
Eons spent in the Underdark also sharpened their
darkvision, allowing them to see twice as far as other
dwarves. This keen eyesight comes at a cost, however,
as a duergar's vision is compromised by sunlight.
Infernal Master. Asmodeus, Lord of the Nine Hells,
has been known to impersonate duergar gods in order
to cultivate the evil brimming in the hearts of the gray
dwarves. He offers them divine guidance and vengeance
against their enemies while urging them on toward
greater acts of tyranny, all the while concealing his
true identity.
i%z
RGAR
Elementals
Air Elemental
Elementals are incarnations of the elements that make
up the universe: air, earth, fire, and water. Though
little more than animated energy on their own planes
of existence, they can be called on by spellcasters and
powerful beings to take shape and perform tasks.
Living Elements. On its home plane, an elemental is
a bodiless life force. Its dim consciousness manifests
as a physical shape only when focused by the power
of magic. A wild spirit of elemental force has no
desire except to course through the element of its
native plane. Like beasts of the Material Plane, these
elemental spirits have no society or culture, and little
sense of being.
Conjured by Magic. Certain spells and magic items
can conjure an elemental, summoning it from the Inner
Planes to the Material Plane. Elementals instinctively
resent being pulled from their native planes and bound
into service. A creature that summons an elemental
must assert force of will to control it.
Bound and Shaped. Powerful magic can bind an
elemental spirit into a material template that defines
a specific use and function. Invisible stalkers are air
elementals bound to a specific form, in the same way
that water elementals can be shaped into water weirds.
The strength of the magic and materials that bind an
elemental determines how well the elemental functions
in a bound form. Golems are elemental spirits bound to
physical forms, but weaker materials such as flesh and
clay can't bind elemental power sufficiently. Durable
materials such as stone and iron require stronger magic,
which consequently binds an elemental more securely.
Elemental Nature. An elemental doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
An air elemental is a funneling cloud of whirling air with
a vague semblance of a face. Although it likes to race
across the ground, picking up dust and debris as itgoes,
it can also fly and attack from above.
An air elemental can turn itself into a screaming4
cyclone, creating a whirlwind that batters creatures
even as it flings them away.
Earth Elemental
An earth elemental plods forward like a walking hill,
club-like arms of jagged stone swinging at its sides. Its
head and body consist of dirt and stone, occasionally set
with chunks of metal, gems, and bright minerals.
Earth elementals glide through rock and earth
as though they were liquid. Earthbound creatures
have much to fear from an earth elemental, since the
elemental can pinpoint the precise location of any foe
that stands on solid ground in its vicinity.
Fire Elemental
A faint humanoid shape threads through the core of
this wild, moving flame. A fire elemental is a force of
capricious devastation. Wherever it moves, it sets its
surroundings ablaze, turning the world to ash, smoke,
and cinders. Water can halt its destructive progress,
causing the fire elemental to shrink back, hissing and
smoking in pain and rage.
Water Elemental
A water elemental is a cresting wave that rolls across
the ground, becoming nearly invisible at it courses
through a larger body of water. It engulfs creatures that
stand against it, filling their mouths and lungs as easily
as it smothers flame.
'/A~-
Aj.R ELEMENTAL
Large elemental, neutral
| Armor Class 15
I Hit Points 90 (12dl 0 + 24)
I Speed 0 ft., fly 90 ft. (hover)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      20 (+5)     14 (+2)       6 (-2)      10 (+0)      6 (-2)
Damage Resistances lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Auran
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Air Form. The elemental can enter a hostile creature's space
and stop there. It can move through a space as narrow as 1
inch wide without squeezing.
Actions
Multiattack. The elemental makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
Whirlwind (Recharge 4-6). Each creature in the elemental's
space must make a DC 13 Strength saving throw. On a failure,
a target takes 15 (3d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage and is flung
up 20 feet away from the elemental in a random direction and
knocked prone. If a thrown target strikes an object, such as a
wall or floor, the target takes 3 (ld6) bludgeoning damage for
every 10 feet it was thrown. If the target is thrown at another
creature, that creature must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity
saving throw or take the same damage and be knocked prone.
If the saving throw is successful, the target takes half the
I bludgeoning damage and isn't flung away or knocked prone.
Earth Elemental
Large elemental, neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 126 (12dl0 + 60)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 30 ft.
1
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)       8(-l)      20 (+5)       5 (-3)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Damage Vulnerabilities thunder
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed, petrified,
poisoned, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 10
Languages Terran
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Earth Glide. The elemental can burrow through nonmagical,
unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the elemental
doesn't disturb the material it moves through.
Siege Monster. The elemental deals double damage to objects
and structures.
Actions
Multiattack. The elemental makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
124
\LS
Fire Elemental
Large elemental, neutral
Water Elemental
Large elemental, neutral
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 102 (12dl0 + 36)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      17 (+3)      16 (+3)       6 (-2)      10 (+0)      7 (-2)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from   I
1    nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
LanguagesIgnan
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Fire Form. The elemental can move through a space as narrow   1
as 1 inch wide without squeezing. A creature that touches the
elemental or hits it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of
it takes 5 (IdlO) fire damage. In addition, the elemental can
enter a hostile creature's space and stop there. The first time it
enters a creature's space on a turn, that creature takes 5 (IdlO)   I
fire damage and catches fire; until someone takes an action to
douse the fire, the creature takes 5 (IdlO) fire damage at the
start of each of its turns.
Illumination. The elemental sheds bright light in a 30-foot
radius and dim light in an additional 30 feet.
Water Susceptibility. For every 5 feet the elemental moves in
water, or for every gallon of water splashed on it, it takes 1
cold damage.
I Actions
Multiattack. The elemental makes two touch attacks.
Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) fire damage. If the target is a creature or a
flammable object, it ignites. Until a creature takes an action to
| douse the fire, the target takes 5 (IdlO) fire damage at the start
of each of its turns.
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 114 (12dl0 +48)
Speed 30 ft., swim 90 ft.
STR
18 (+4)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
18 (+4)
INT
5 (-3)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)

Damage Resistances acid; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Aquan
; Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Water Form. The elemental can enter a hostile creature's space
and stop there. It can move through a space as narrow as 1
inch wide without squeezing.
Freeze. If the elemental takes cold damage, it partially freezes;
its speed is reduced by 20 feet until the end of its next turn.
Actions
tes:
- - - _.----------   -                   -^    e
Multiattack. The elemental makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Whelm (Recharge 4-6). Each creature in the elemental's space
must make a DC 15 Strength saving throw. On a failure, a
target takes 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If it is Large or
smaller, it is also grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple
ends, the target is restrained and unable to breathe unless it
can breathe water. If the saving throw is successful, the target
is pushed out of the elemental's space.
The elemental can grapple one Large creature or up to two
Medium or smaller creatures at one time. At the start of each
of the elemental's turns, each target grappled by it takes 13
(2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. A creature within 5 feet of the
elemental can pull a creature or object out of it by taking an
action to make a DC 14 Strength and succeeding.



NTAfc-S

125
ElveS: Drow
Tens of thousands of years ago, the elves were divided,
with those of benevolent disposition battling those
that were selfish and cruel. The war among elvenkind
ended when the good elves banished their malevolent
kin to the subterranean depths. Here, in the lightless
caverns and endless warrens of twisting passages, the
dark elves—the drow—found refuge. They also found
leadership in the only elven deity who had not forsaken
them. At her command, the dark elves built an empire in
the underworld.
Children ofLolth. The drow worship Lolth, a deity
who resides in the Abyss. Known as the Spider Queen
or the Demon Queen of Spiders, she is the figure around
which the dark elves have built their subterranean
civilization. Whatever she demands, the drow do.
The wickedest of elves, drow are seldom seen by the
surface world. Though they plot to destroy the elves
that banished them, they no longer see themselves as
exiles. They are the destined rulers of the darkness, and
when Lolth commands them to rise up and destroy their
surface-dwelling kin, they will.
Creatures of Darkness. The drow have lived
underground for so long that they have evolved to
their surroundings and can see in the dark. However,
they can no longer stand sunlight. When slaves are
in short supply in the Underdark, the drow send
raiding parties to the surface to capture humanoids
under cover of darkness, bringing them back to their
cities to be tortured into submission. Beyond those
occasional excursions, the drow are content to remain
in their subterranean realm, where they feel secure
and in control.
Underdark Cities. The dark elves build fantastic
cities in enormous caverns where food and water are
abundant. Their ability to sculpt stone rivals that of the
greatest dwarf artisans, yet their structures retain a
decidedly elven aesthetic. Though appearing delicate,
drow settlements are structurally sound and remarkably
resilient. The drow like to hollow out enormous
talagmites and stalactites, creating populated spires
that rise from the floors and ceilings.
A drow city is a sprawling metropolis enclosed by high
;-^%lls. Non-drow visitors must conduct their business
jputside the walls under watchful eyes. The drow raise
and keep giant spiders to help protect their cities against
*d.____________________________________________________k.
Variant: Drow Magic Armor and Weapons
Drow often wear magic armor and carry magic weapons that
lose their enhancement bonuses permanently if they are
exposed to sunlight for 1 hour or longer,
A drow wearing a +7 chain shirt and carrying a +7
shortsword has AC 19 and a +1 bonus on attack and damage
rolls with shortsword attacks.
A drow elite warrior wearing +2 studded leather and carrying f
a +2shortsword has AC 20 and a +2 bonus on attack and
damage rolls with shortsword attacks.
A drow priestess ofLolth wearing +3 scale mail has AC 19.     /
A
\
intruders, even as they drape those cities in beautiful
webbing, creating a gossamer snare to catch flying
enemies that would otherwise soar over the walls.
Drow Magic, just as the drow have adapted to
underground life, so too has their magic. In addition to
using that magic to carve their cities from stone, they
empower their weapons, create dangerous new magic
items, and summon demons from the Abyss. Drow
spellcasters are supremely arrogant and never hesitate
to use their magic in the most abhorrent ways.
Arms and Armor. Drow craft weapons made of
adamantine, a dark and supernaturally hard metal.
Drow artisans adorn their weapons and armor
with web-like filigree and spider motifs, and mages
sometimes imbue items with magic to enhance their
effectiveness. However, such magic fades when exposed
to sunlight, so that magical drow weapons and armor
rarely retain their enhancement bonuses and magical
properties when brought to the surface.
Cutthroat Politics. Drow politics are cutthroat
and rife with intrigue. When drow work together, it
is typically to destroy a common foe and ensure their
own survival, and such alliances are short lived and
fraught with peril.
Drow society is divided into noble houses, each ruled
by a matron who seeks to raise the prestige and power
of her house above all others. Other high-ranking
members of the house are blood relatives, while the
middling ranks are flush with drow from weaker
families that have sworn fealty to the greater house.
Clinging precariously to the bottom rungpf a house's
social ladder are the house slaves, made up of drow of
low birth and the occasional non-drow captive.
Matriarchal Rule. Lolth, through her faithful
priestesses, dictates the rules of drow society, ensuring
that her orders and plots are carried out. Since Lolth
is prone to manifesting on the Material Plane and
directly punishing those that disobey her, the drow
have learned to heed what she says and do as her
priestesses command.
In drow society, males are subservient to females.
A male drow might lead an Underdark patrol or a
raiding party to the surface, but he reports to a female
drow—either the matron of his house or one of her
hand-picked female subordinates. Although male drow
can fill almost any function in drow society, they can't be
priests, nor can they rule a house.
Poison Predilection. Distilled from spider venom
and the flora of the Underdark, poison can be found in
abundance among the drow, and it plays an important
part in their culture and politics. Drow mages concoct
a viscid toxin that leaves enemies unconscious. Drow
warriors coat their blades and crossbow bolts with this
venom, looking forward to the interrogation and torture
that follows combat.
Drow Elite Warrior______________
Drow elite warriors defend their houses and their
superiors against all enemies, although they specialize
in fighting dwarves, gnomes, and elves (including
other drow). They frequently raid surface settlements
under cover of night, returning tp the Underdark with
prisoners and spoils in tow before dawn.
Elite warriors can be male or female.
Drow Mage
----------------------,-------------------:-------------:-----IJ(^C;- .vny
Privileged drow males who lack the strength and-^
fighting prowess to train as warriors have no recourse
but tp pursue the study of magic. For them, it is a matter1
of survival. Female drow with a natural affinity fpMhe
arcane arts may also become drow mages, although
they are much less common.
Drow Priestess ofJLolth
Female drow with blood ties to a noble house are
molded and trained from birth to become priestesses
of Lolth. The Spider Queen doesn't allow male drow to
hold such positions.
Such priestesses execute the will of the Spider
Queen, and as a result, they wield tremendous power
and influence in drow society. The matron mothers who
rule the drow houses are the most powerful of Lolth's
priestesses, but they must constantly balance their
devotion to the Spider Queen with their devotion to
their families.
■...:>

Drov? Elite Warrior
1
*   duCH T6RR1FVING CRUELTV. ThEV
-SUCH OEPRAV^TV. SUCH «*"'                     ELVgNK.NO."
ARE The vae po.so* th*t -^R,AUTUMNVJELL.
e.PCUER.COrCoREUOMLARETH.AM
-----
Drow
Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (chain shirt)
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
I   10 (+0)      14 (+2)     10 (+0)      11 (+0)     11 (+0)      12 (+1)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can't put the drow to sleep.
Innate Spellcasting. The drow's spellcasting ability is Charisma
(spell save DC 11). It can innately cast the following spells,
requiring no material components:
At will: dancing lights
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or
be poisoned for 1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more,
the target is also unconscious while poisoned in this way. The
target wakes up if it takes damage or if another creature takes
an action to shake it awake.
Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil
Armor Class 18 (studded leather, shield)
Hit Points 71 (lld8 + 22)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      18 (+4)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)     13 (+1)      12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +5, Wis +4
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +10
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can't put the drow to sleep.
Innate Spellcasting. The drow's spellcasting ability is Charisma   I
(spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following spells,
requiring no material components:
At will: dancing lights
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only)
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes two shortsword attacks.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6)
poison damage.
Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or
be poisoned for 1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more,
the target is also unconscious while poisoned in this way. The
target wakes up if it takes damage or if another creature takes
an action to shake it awake.
Reactions____________________________
Parry. The drow adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack that
would hit it. To do so, the drow must see the attacker and be
wielding a melee weapon.
is 8
SEVTBSi GROW
0m t
ii?iii"f'

Drow Mage
Medium hunianoid (elf), neutral eyiil
Drow Priestess of Lolth
Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 45 (10d8)
Speed 30 ft.
..  STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
'9(-l)       14 (+2)      10 (+0)      17 (+3)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)
Skills Arcana +6, Deception +5, Perception +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can't put the drow to sleep.
Innate Spellcasting. The drow's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring no material components:
At will: dancing lights
"1/day each: darkness, faerie f re, levitate (self only)
Spellcasting. The drow is a lOth-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to
hit with spell attacks). The drow has the following wizard
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, poison spray,
ray of frost
1st level (4 slots): mage armor, magic missile, shield, witch bolt
2nd level (3 slots): alter self, misty step, web
3rd level (3 slots): fly, lightning bolt
4th level (3 slots): Evard's black tentacles, greater invisibility
5th level (2 slots): cloudkill
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 2 (ld6 - 1) bludgeoning damage, or 3 (ld8 - 1)
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands, plus 3 (ld6)
poison damage.
Summon Demon (1/Day). The drow magically summons a
quasit, or attempts to summon a shadow demon with a 50
percent chance of success. The summoned demon appears in
an unoccupied space within 60 feet of its summoner, acts as
an ally of its summoner, and can't summon other demons. It
' remains for 10 minutes, until it or its summoner dies, or until
its summoner dismisses it as an action.
Armor Class 16 (scale mail)
Hit Points 71 (13d8+13)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
10,(+0)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      12 (+1)
INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      17 (+3)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +6, Cha +7
Skills Insight+6, Perception +6, Religion +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can't put the drow to sleep.
Innate Spellcasting. The drow's innate spellcasting ability
is Charisma (spell save DC 15). She can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: dancing lights
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only)
Spellcasting. The drow is a lOth-level spellcaster. Her
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell
attacks). The drow has the following cleric spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): guidance, poison spray, resistance, spare the
dying, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): animal friendship, cure wounds, detect poison
and disease, ray of sickness
2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, protection from poison, web
3rd level (3 slots): conjure animals (2 giant spiders), dispel magic
4th level (3 slots): divination, freedom of movement
5th level (2 slots): insect plague, mass cure wounds
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes two scourge attacks.
Scourge. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage plus 17 (5d6) poison damage.
Summon Demon (1/Day). The drow attempts to magically
summon a yochlol with a 30 percent chance of success. If
the attempt fails, the drow takes 5 (ldlO) psychic damage.
Otherwise, the summoned demon appears in an unoccupied
space within 60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its
summoner, and can't summon other demons. It remains for 10
minutes, until it or its summoner dies, or until its summoner
dismisses it as an action.
Empyrean
Empyreans are the celestial children of the
gods of the Upper Planes. They are universally^
beautiful, statuesque, and self-assured.
Manifest Emotion. An empyrean can experience
deity-like fits of serenity or rage. It can affect the
environment around it by its mood. When an empyr^aTB
is urihappy, the clouds might cry tears of salt water, the
wildflowers in surrounding meadows might wilt, dead
fish might wash ashore in lakes or rivers, or a nearby
forest might lose the leaves from its trees. When an
empyrean is jubilant, sunlight follows it everywhere,
small animals frolic in its footsteps, and birds fill the sky
with their pleasing songs.
Evil Empyreans. A few empyreans have turned to
evil after venturing to the Lower Planes and becoming
corrupted, or as the result of being cursed by evil gods.
An evil empyrean can't survive long on the Upper
Planes and usually retreats to the Material Plane,
where it can rule over a kingdom of mortals as an
indomitable tyrant.
Immortal Titans. Empyreans don't age but can be
slain. Because few empyreans can imagine their own
demise, they fight fearlessly when drawn into battle,
refusing to believe that the end is upon them even when
standing at death's door. When an empyrean dies, its
spirit returns to its home plane. There, one of the fallen
empyrean's parents resurrects the empyrean unless he
or she has a good reason not to.
Empyrean
Huge celestial (titan), chaotic good (75%) or neutral evil (25%)
I Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
| Hit Points 313 (19dl2+ 190)
Speed 50 ft., fly 50 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
30 (+10)     21 (+5)     30 (+10)     21 (+5)     22 (+6)     27 (+8)
Saving Throws Str +17, Int +12, Wis +13, Cha +15
Skills Insight+13, Persuasion +15
! Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 16
{ Languages all
! Challenge 23 (32,500 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The empyrean's innate spellcasting ability
I is Charisma (spell save DC 23, +15 to hit with spell attacks).
1 It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
1 components:
At will: greater restoration, pass without trace, water breathing,
water walk
I 1/day each: commune, dispel evil and good, earthquake.fire
storm, plane shift (self only)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the empyrean fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The empyrean has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The empyrean's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Maul. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 31 (6d6 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw
or be stunned until the end of the empyrean's next turn.
Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +15 to hit, range 600 ft., one target.
Hit: 24 (7d6) damage of one of the following types (empyrean's
•choice): acid, cold, fire, force, lightning, radiant, or thunder.
Legendary Actions____________________
The empyrean can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
The empyrean regains spent legendary actions at the start
of its turn.
Attack. The empyrean makes one attack.
Bolster. The empyrean bolsters all nonhostile creatures within
120 feet of it until the end of its next turn. Bolstered creatures
can't be charmed or frightened, and they gain advantage
on ability checks and saving throws until the end of the
empyrean's next turn.
Trembling Strike (Costs 2 Actions). The empyrean strikes the
ground with its maul, triggering an earth tremor. All other
creatures on the ground within 60 feet of the empyrean
must succeed on a DC 25 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
-             -                              ■        *-  <-•*■■
-----—~'
130
I  BJfP^EAN
Ettercap
Ettercaps are humanoid spiders that tend, feed, and
watch, over spiders the way a shepherd oversees a flock
of sheep. They lair deep in remote forests.
Fine strands of silk stream from glands in an
ettercap's abdomen, letting it shoot sticky strands of
webbing to bind, entrap, or strangle its victims. It can
also use its webbing to fashion elaborate snares and
nets, which often festoon its lair.
Quiet Killers. When travelers and explorers venture
into an ettercap's territory, the ettercap stalks them.
Some meet their end wandering blindly into traps or
sections of forest enclosed by webs. Others, the ettercap
garrotes with strands of web or envenoms with its
poisonous bite.
Sylvan Despoilers. Though they dwell in the wilds,
ettercaps have no desire to live in harmony with nature.
A forest infested with ettercaps transforms into a
gloomy place, choked with webs and infested with giant
spiders, giant insects, and other sinister predators.
Creatures that wander too far into such a wood are soon
lost in a maze of webs that dangle with the bones and
lost treasures of the ettercaps' victims.
Enemies of the Fey. Ettercaps are natural enemies
of fey creatures. The foul creatures set web snares to
catch sprites and pixies, which they hungrily devour,
and will' encase a dryad's tree in webbing in a vain
attempt to trap the dryad. Otherwise timid fey will
sometimes approach outsiders for help in dealing with
an ettercap infestation, being ill-equipped to deal with
ithe malevolenfcpreatures themselves.
Variant: Web Carrote
Some ettercaps like to strangle prey using garrotes fashioned
from webbing. An ettercap so armed gains the following
action option, which it uses in place of its claws.
Web Carrote. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach
5 ft., one Medium or Small creature against which the
ettercap has advantage on the attack roll. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2)
bludgeoning damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC
12). Until this grapple ends, the target can't breathe, and the
ettercap has advantage on attack rolls against it.
u   jl'm1"
T"ip™"i""
- '      -"-■■'-     -   :    -   '■■■    "'--1
Ettercap
Medium monstrosity, neutral evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR
14 (+2)
DEX         CON
15 (+2)      13 (+1)
INT
7 (-2)
WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      8 (-1)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4, Survival +3
' Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Spider Climb. The ettercap can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the ettercap knows
the exact location of any other creature in contact with
the same web.
Web Walker. The ettercap ignores movement restrictions
caused by webbing.
Actions
Multiattack. The ettercap makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft,, one creature.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) poison damage.
The target must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw
or be poisoned for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range
30/60 ft., one Large or smaller creature. Hit: The creature is
restrained by webbing. As an action, the restrained creature
can make a DC 11 Strength check, escaping from the webbing
on a success. The effect ends if the webbing is destroyed. The
webbing has AC 10, 5 hit points, resistance to bludgeoning
damage, and immunity to poison and psychic damage.
131
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (10dl0+30)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
21 (+5)
DEX
8(-l)
CON
17 (+3)
INT          WIS
6 (-2)      10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)
] Skills Perception +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Giant, Ore
Challenge 4(1,100 XP)
Two Heads. The ettin has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks and on saving throws against being blinded, charmed,
i deafened, frightened, stunned, and knocked unconscious.
Wakeful. When one of the ettin's heads is asleep, its other
i   head is awake.
\ Actions_____________________________
j Multiattack. The ettin makes two attacks: one with its
battleaxe and one with its morningstar.
1 Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (2d8+ 5) slashing damage.
Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) piercing damage.
Ettin;
An ettin is a foul,- two-headed giant with the crude
characteristics of an ore. It never bathes if it can help it,
and its thick skin is usually encrusted with a thick layer
of dirt and grime beneath the stinking hides it wears.
Its long stringy hair hangs in an unkempt mess about
its faces, and its breath reeks from mouths filled with
crooked teeth and tusks.
Dual Personality. The twin heads of an ettin are two
individuals trapped in the same brutish body. Each head
has its own mind, personality, and name, and possesses
unique preferences and quirks. Bound from birth, both
minds only rarely experience privacy or solitude. This
familiarity breeds contempt, and an ettin bullies and
argues with itself constantly, its two heads each taking
constant offense at the other's slights.
When other creatures refer to an ettin, they combine
its double names to form a single compound name that
applies to the creature as a whole. If an ettin has one
head named Hargle and another named Vargle, other
creatures call the ettin Harglevargle.
Solitary Lives. As much as an ettin argues
with itself, it is even less tolerant of other ettins,
since a conversation between two ettins almost
always amounts to a shouting match between
a crowd of four belligerent heads. Most ettins
are solitary creatures as a result, tolerating
one another only to reproduce.
An ettin's twin heads are always
the same gender, with a body to match.
Females are the dominant gender among
ettins, and they initiate the ettins' mating rituals. After
finding a suitable den, a female ettin hunts and conquers
a male, which cares for and feeds her during her six-
month pregnancy. Once the child is born, the male
ettin is released from servitude. When the child is old
enough to hunt for itself, the mother sends it away and
abandons the den.
Two Heads are Better than One. When focused on
a mutually beneficial purpose or united by a common
threat, an ettin can resolve its personality differences
and dedicate itself fully to a task. An ettin fights with a
weapon in each hand, making twin attacks directed by
its respective heads. When an ettin sleeps, one of its
heads remains ever alert, gaining its only moments of
privacy and keeping two eyes open for any creature that
disturbs its precious solitude.
Orcish Ties. In ancient dialects of Common, the word
"ettin" translates as "ugly giant." Legends tell of ores
that once stumbled upon a temple to Demogorgon, the
magic of which transformed them into giant mockeries
of the twin-headed Prince of Demons. Driven to near
madness, these creatures scattered into the wilderness
to become the first ettins.
Whatever the truth of the ettins' origin, ores treat
them as distant cousins, and ore tribes often entice
ettins to serve as guards, scouts, and marauders. An
ettin isn't particularly loyal to its ore handlers, but the
ores can win it over with the promise of food and loot.
132
Wfttf
Faerie Dragon
Tiny dragon, chaotic good
' Armor Class 15
Hit Points 14 (4d4 +4)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)      20 (+5)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)     12 (+1)      16 (+3)
Skills Arcana +4, Perception +3, Stealth +7
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Draconic, Sylvan
Challenge 1 (200 XP) for a red, orange, or yellow faerie dragon;
2 (450 XP) for a green, blue, indigo, or violet faerie dragon
Superior Invisibility. As a bonus action, the dragon can
, magically turn invisible until its concentration ends (as if
concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the dragon wears or
carries is invisible with it.
Limited Telepathy. Using telepathy, the dragon can magically
; communicate with any other faerie dragon within 60 feet of it.
I Magic Resistance. The dragon has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Faerie Dragon
A faerie dragon is a cat-sized dragon with butterfly
wings. It wears a sharp-toothed grin and expresses its
delight by the twitching of its tail, its merriment facing
only if it is attacked.
Invisible Tricksters. The only warning of a faerie
dragon's presence is a stifled giggle. The dragon sl!ays
out of sight, watching invisibly as its victims contend,
with its pranks. When its fun is done, the dragon might
reveal itself, depending on the disposition of its'^rey."
Friendly and Bright. A faerie dragon has a sharp
mind, a fondness for treasure and good company, and
a puckish sense of humor. Travelers can play to a faerie
dragon's draconic nature by offering it "treasure" in the
form of sweets, baked goods, and baubles in exchange
for information or safe passage through its territory.
The Colors of Age. A faerie dragon's scales change
hue as it ages, moving through all the colors of the
rainbow. All faerie dragons have innate spellcasting
ability, gaining new spells as they mature.
Dragon Color	Age Range
Red	5 years or less
Orange	6-10 years
Yellow	11-20 years
Green	21-30 years
Blue	31-40 years
Indigo	41-50 years
Violet	51 years or more

IMt~.HHfcMmi.Sil«»
■-" ^awsus-^cj----------
Innate Spellcasting. The dragon's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 13). It can innately cast a number of
spells, requiring no material components. As the dragon ages
and changes color, it gains additional spells as shown below.
Red, 1/day each: dancing lights, mage hand, minor illusion
Orange, 1/day: color spray
Yellow, 1 /day: mirror image
Green, 1/day: suggestion
Blue, 1/day: major image
Indigo, 1/day: hallucinatory terrain
Violet, 1/day: polymorph
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Euphoria Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a puff of
euphoria gas at one creature within 5 feet of it. The target must
succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw, or for 1 minute, the
target can't take reactions and must roll a d6 at the start of
each of its turns to determine its behavior during the turn:
1-4. The target takes no action or bonus action and uses all
of its movement to move in a random direction.
5-6. The target doesn't move, and the only thing it can do
on its turn is make a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
SBU&tS
133
Flameskull
Blazing green flames and mad, echoing laughter follow
a disembodied skull as it patrols its demesne. When
the undead flameskull discovers trespassers, it blasts
the intruders with fiery rays from its eyes and dreadful
spells called up from the dark recesses of its memory.
Dark spellcasters fashion flameskulls from the
remains of dead wizards. When the ritual is complete,
green flames erupt from the skull to complete its ghastly
transformation.
Legacy of Life. A flameskull only dimly recalls its
former life. Though it might speak in its old voice and
recount key events from its past, it is but an echo of its
former self. However, its undead transformation grants
it full access to the magic it wielded in life, letting it
cast spells while ignoring the material and somatic
components it can no longer employ.
Eternally Bound. Intelligent and vigilant, a flameskull
serves its creator by protecting a hidden treasure hoard,
a secret chamber, or a specific individual. A flameskull
carries out the directives given to it when it was created,
and it interprets those commands to the letter. A
flameskull's master must craft its instructions with care
to ensure that the creature carries out its tasks properly.
Wreathed in Flame. The fire wreathing a flameskull
burns continually, giving off bright light that the
creature controls. It uses those flames as a weapon,
focusing them to loose them as fiery rays from its
eye sockets.
Eldritch Rejuvenation. A flameskull's shattered
fragments reform unless they are splashed with holy
water or subjected to a dispel magic of remove curse
spell. If it can no longer fulfill its intended purpose,
the re-formed flameskull is beholden to no one and
becomes autonomous.
Undead Nature. A flameskull doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
f,-y "■w»i
~
_
,.:,
Flameskull
Tiny undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 40 (9d4+18)
Speed Oft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
1 (-5)       17 (+3)      14 (+2)      16 (+3)     10 (+0)      11 (+0)
Skills Arcana +5, Perception +2
! Damage Resistances lightning, necrotic, piercing
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
, Languages Common
Challenge 4(1,100 XP)
Illumination. The flameskull sheds either dim light in a 15-foot
| radius, or bright light in a 15-foot radius and dim light for
4 an additional 15 feet. It can switch between the options as
1 an action.
Magic Resistance. The flameskull has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Rejuvenation. If the flameskull is destroyed, it regains all its hif
points in 1 hour unless holy water is sprinkled on its remains or
a dispel magic or remove curse spell is cast on them.
Spellcasting. The flameskull is a 5th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to
hit with spell attacks). It requires no somatic or material
components to cast its spells. The flameskull has the following
wizard spells prepared:
Cantrip (at will): mage hand
1st level (3 slots): magic missile, shield
2nd level (2 slots): blur, flaming sphere
3rd level (1 s\ot): fireball
Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The flameskull uses Fire Ray twice.
Fire Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 30 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage.
--   »-   - -              - ■   -■     --            -        - ' -■■    -■■ ——. 'i
m
\
FtAWESK.Ul.1.
Flumph
The mysterious flumphs drift through the Underdark,
propelled through the air by the jets whose sound gives
them their name. A flumph glows faintly, reflecting
its moods in its color. Soft pink means it is amused,
deep blue is sadness, green expresses curiosity, and
crimson is anger.
Intelligent and Wise. Flumphs communicate
telepathically. Though they resemble jellyfish, flumphs
are sentient beings of great intelligence and wisdom,
possessing advanced knowledge of religion, philosophy,
mathematics, and countless other subjects.
Flumphs are sensitive to the emotional states of
nearby creatures. If a creature's thoughts suggest
goodness, a flumph seeks that creature out. When
facing creatures that exude evil, a flumph flees.
Psionic Siphons. Flumphs feed by siphoning mental
energy from psionic creatures, and they can be found
lurking near communities of mind flayers, aboleths,
githyanki, and githzerai. As passive parasites, they take
only the mental energy they need, and most creatures
feel no loss or discomfort from such feeding.
Consuming psionic energy reveals the thoughts and
emotions of the creatures on which the flumphs feed.
Since so many of those creatures are evil, flumphs are
often subjected to thoughts, emotions, and hungers that
sicken their pure nature. When flumphs encounter good-
hearted adventurers, they eagerly share the dark secrets
they have learned in the hopes of casting down their
evil sources of energy, even if doing so means they must
seek out new sources.of nourishment.
Flumph Society. Flumphs live in complex and
organized groups called cloisters, within which each
flumph has a place and purpose. These harmonious
groupings have no need for leaders, since all flumphs
contribute in their own way.
Flumph
/ Small aberration, lawful good
| Armor Class 12
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
I Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
6 (-2)
DEX         CON
15 (+2)     10 (+0)
INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)     14 (+2)      11 (+0)
Skills Arcana +4, History +4, Religion +4
Damage Vulnerabilities psychic
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages understands Undercommon but can't speak,
telepathy 60 ft.
I Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
I Advanced Telepathy. The flumph can perceive the content of
1 any telepathic communication used within 60 feet of it, and it
\ can't be surprised by creatures with any form of telepathy.
| Prone Deficiency. If the flumph is knocked prone, roll a die.
I On an odd result, the flumph lands upside-down and is

■-' i^<a^f^^-    ■ —
'Trust a flumph."
-X the Mystic's ,st rule of dungeon surv.val
incapacitated. At the end 'of each of its turns, the flumph can
make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw, righting itself and ending
the incapacitated condition if it succeeds.
Telepathic Shroud. The flumph is immune to any effect that
would sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as all
divination spells.
Actions
Tendrils. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (1d4) acid
damage. At the end of each of its turns, the target must make
a DC 10 Constitution saving throw, taking 2 (ld4) acid damage
on a failure or ending the recurring acid damage on a success.
A lesser restoration spell cast on the target also ends the
recurring acid damage.
Stench Spray (I/Day). Each creature in a 15-foot cone
originating from the flumph must succeed on a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw or be coated in a foul-smelling liquid.
A coated creature exudes a horrible stench for 1d4 hours. The
coated creature is poisoned as long as the stench lasts, and
other creatures are poisoned while within 5 feet of the coated
creature. A creature can remove the stench on itself by using a
short rest to bathe in water, alcohol, or vinegar.                              ,
~
»AA^--      -..     .

FOMOjtlAN
Huge giant, chaotic evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 149'(13dl2 + 65)
Speed 30 ft.

STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      10 (+0)     20 (+5)       9 (-1)      14 (+2)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Giant, Undercommon
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The fomorian attacks twice with its greatclub or
makes one greatclub attack and uses Evil Eye once.
Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Evil Eye. The fomorian magically forces a creature it can see
within 60 feet of it to make a DC 14 Charisma saving throw. The
creature takes 27 (6d8) psychic damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Curse of the Evil Eye (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest).
With a stare, the fomorian uses Evil Eye, but on a failed
save, the creature is also cursed with magical deformities.
While deformed, the creature has its speed halved and has
disadvantage on ability checks, saving throws, and attacks
based on Strength or Dexterity.
The transformed creature can repeat the saving throw
whenever it finishes a long rest, ending the effect on a success.
Fomorian
Th&ifip'st hideous and wicked of all giantkind are the
godless fomorians, whose deformed bodies reflect their
vile demeanors. Some have facial features randomly
distributed around their misshapen, warty heads.
Others have limbs of grossly different sizes and shapes,
or emit terrible howls each time they draw breath
through misshapen mouths. Their wretched appearance
rarely evokes sympathy, however, for the fomorians
brought their doom upon themselves with the evil that
rules their hearts and minds.
Fey Curse. The elves remember when the fomorians
were among the most handsome of races, possessed
of brilliant minds and unrivaled magical ability. That
physical perfection did not extend to their hearts,
however, as a lust for magic and power consumed them.
The fomorians sought to conquer the Feywild and
enslave its inhabitants, claiming those creatures' magic
for themselves. When the fey united to defend their
realm, the fomorians fought them and were subjected to
a terrible curse.
One by one, the giants fell as their bodies were
warped to reflect the evil in their hearts. Stripped of
their grace and magical power, the wretched horrors
fled from the light, delving deep beneath the world
to nurse their hatred. Cursing their fate, they have
ever after plotted vengeance against the fey that
wronged them.
Giants of the Underdark. The fomorians dwell
in eerily beautiful caverns in the Underdark, rarely
venturing to the surface. Their lairs feature abundant
access to water, fish, and mushroom forests, as well as
to the creatures whose slave labor keeps the fomorians
fed. When those slaves can no longer toil, they are
slain and devoured. Wickedness and depravity are the
cornerstones of fomorian society, in which the strongest
and crudest giants rule. Fomorians mark their
territories with the corpses of their enemies, painting
their cavern walls with blood or stitching together limbs
and body parts to make mockeries of the creatures they
have killed.
Ruined Flesh, Evil Minds. The deformities visited
on the fomorians prevent them from hurling rocks like
their giant kin, or wearing anything more than scraps
of cloth. However, the grotesque positioning of their
eyes, noses, and ears gives fomorians keen perceptive
abilities, making it hard to surprise or ambush them.
The greed and evil of the fomorians lies at the heart
of their degeneration and fall, and continues to plague
them. Fomorians make alliances with other creatures
when it suits them, but they are disloyal by nature and
betray their allies on a whim.
Curse of the Evil Eye. Fomorians can pass their
curse onto others using a power called the evil eye—a
last vestige of the giants' once-remarkable spellcasting
ability. A creature cursed by a fomorian's evil eye is
magically twisted and deformed, gaining a glimpse into
the pain and malice that has consumed this evil race.
i"S6
Fungi
With its sky of jagged stone and perpetual night, the
Underdark is home to all manner of fungi. Taking the
place of plants in the subterranean realm, fungi are vital
to the survival of many underground species, providing1
nourishment and shelter in the unforgiving darkness.
Fungi spawn in organic matter, then break that matter,
down to consume it, feeding on filth and corpses. As
they mature, fungi eject spores that drift on the lightest
breeze to spawn new fungi.
Not needing sunlight or warmth to grow, fungi
thrive in every corner and crevice of the Underdark.
Transformed by the magic that permeates that
underground realm, Underdark fungi often develop
potent defensive mechanisms or abilities of mimicry
and attack. The largest specimens can spread to create
vast subterranean forests in which countless create
live and feed.
Gas Spore
y-
The first gas spores are thought to have been spawn
from dead beholders, whose moldering corpses fed a
parasitic fungus with aberrant magic. Having long since
adapted into a unique plant creature, a gas spore grows
quickly and purposefully out of any corpse, creating a
malevplent-looking mockery of the most feared denizen
of the Underdark.
Eye Tyrant's Form. A gas spore is a spherical,
balloon-like fungus that resembles a beholder from a
distance, though its true nature becomes, increasingly
obvious as one approaches it. The monster possesses
a blind central "eye" and rhizome growths sprouting
from its upper surface, superficially resembling a
beholder's eyestalks.
Death Burst. A gas spore is a hollow shell filled with a
lighter-than-air gas that enables it to float as a beholder
does. Piercing the shell with even the weakest attack
causes the creature to burst apart, releasing a cloud
of deadly spores. A creature that inhales the spores
becomes host to them, and is often dead within a day. Its
corpse then becomes the spawning ground from which
new gas spores arise.
Beholder Memories. A gas spore that sprouts from a
beholder's corpse sometimes carries within it memories
of its deceased parent. When the gas spore explodes, its
deadly spores cast those memories adrift. Any creature
that inhales the spores and survives inherits one or
more of the beholder's fragmented memories, and might
gain useful information about the beholder's former lair
and other nearby places and creatures of interest.
<*%
Shrieker
A shrieker is a human-sized mushroom that emits a
piercing screech to drive off creatures that disturb it.
Other creatures use the fungi as an alarm to signal the
approach of prey, and various intelligent races of the
Underdark cultivate shriekers on the outskirts of their
communities to discourage trespassers.
L
•
■SI
y
Shrieker Medium piahi, unaligned	■."■-■ai^.'j    -■-"■__s-aj^»e-aaa^g«s«
Armor Class 5 Hit Points 13 (3d8) Speed 0 ft.

STR           DEX         CON 1 (-5)        1 (-5)      10 (+0)	INT          WIS 1 (-5)      3 (-4)	CHA l(-5)
Large plant, Unaligned
Armor Class 5
Hit Points 1 (1dl0-4)
Speed 0 ft., fly 10 ft. (hover)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
5 (-3)        l(-5)       3 (-4)        l(-5)       l(-5)        1 (-5)
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities blinded,
poisoned, prone
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind
passive Perception 5
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
deafened, frightened, paralyzed,
beyond this radius),
Actions
Death Burst. The gas spore explodes when it drops to 0 hit
points. Each creature within 20 feet of it must succeed on a DC
15 Constitution saving throw or take 10 (3d6) poison damage
and become infected with a disease on a failed save. Creatures
! immune to the poisoned condition are immune to this disease.
Spores invade an infected creature's system, killing the
creature in a number of hours equal to ldl2 + the creature's
\ Constitution score, unless the disease is removed. In half
i that time, the creature becomes poisoned for the rest of the
I duration. After the creature dies, it sprouts 2d4 Tiny gas spores
I that grow to full size in 7 days.
Eerie Resemblance. The gas spore resembles a beholder. A
I creature that can see the gas spore can discern its true nature
I with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Nature) check.
: Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
I creature. Hit: 1 poison damage, and the creature must succeed   j
| on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or become infected with
I the disease described in the Death Burst trait.
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, frightened
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 6
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
False Appearance. While the shrieker remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from an ordinary fungus.
Reactions____________________________
Shriek. When bright light or a creature is within 30 feet of the
shrieker, it emits a shriek audible within 300 feet of it. The
shrieker continues to shriek until the disturbance moves out of
range and for ld4 of the shrieker's turns afterward.
Violet Fungus_______________
This purplish mushroom uses root-like feelers growing
from its base to creep across cavern floors. The four
stalks protruding from a violet fungi's central mass
are used to lash out at prey, rotting flesh with the
slightest touch. Any creature killed by a violet fungus
decomposes rapidly. A new violet fungus sprouts from
the moldering corpse, growing to full size in 2d6 days.
Violet Fungus
Medium plant, unaligned
Armor Class 5
Hit Points 18 (4d8)
Speed 5 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)        l(-5)      10 (+0)       l(-5)       3 (-4)       1 (-5)
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, frightened
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 6
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
False Appearance. While the violet fungus remains motionless,
it is indistinguishable from an ordinary fungus.
Actions

Multiattack. The fungus makes ld4 Rotting Touch attacks.
Rotting Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 10 ft., one i
creature. Hit: 4 (ld8) necrotic damage.
e=:
—=—
--"■' *       - -       i
138
W>w}
fU^rv.
Galeb Duhr
Medium elemental, neutral
Galeb Duhr
The galeb duhr is a boulder-like creature with stumpy
appendages that act as arms and legs. It has the ability
to animate the rocks and boulders around it, and is thus
usually encountered in rocky terrain.
Powerful magic allows a spellcaster to summon a
galeb duhr from the Plane of Earth. Some galeb duhr
also form naturally in places touched by that plane. The
galeb duhr is imbued with greater intelligence than most
elementals, allowing it to better assess threats and to
communicate with creatures entering its guarded area.
Stone Guardian. A galeb duhr doesn't age or require
sustenance, making it an excellent sentinel. A powerful
druid might charge a galeb duhr with protecting a stone
circle or sacred hilltop. Another galeb duhr might be
created to guard an underground tomb or a wizard's
tower. When it chooses to, the galeb duhr can make
itself look like an ordinary boulder, remaining perfectly
still .for years^ata time.
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
I Hit Points 85 (9d8 + 45)
Speed 15 ft. (30 ft. when rolling, 60 ft. rolling downhill)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)      14 (+2)      20 (+5)      11 (+0)     12 (+1)      11 (+0)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed,
poisoned, petrified
Senses darkvision 60 ft, tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 11
Languages Terran
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
False Appearance. While the galeb duhr remains motionless, it
is indistinguishable from a normal boulder.
Rolling Charge. If the galeb duhr rolls at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a slam attack on the same
turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. If
the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 16 Strength
saving throw or be knocked prone.
Actions
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
Animate Boulders (1/Day). The galeb duhr magically animates
up to two boulders it can see within 60 feet of it. A boulder has
statistics like those of a galeb duhr, except it has Intelligence 1
and Charisma 1, it can't be charmed or frightened, and it lacks
this action option. A boulder remains animated as long as
the galeb duhr maintains concentration, up to 1 minute (as if
concentrating on a spell).
.   . '.._. _   .._'_■ .—-_ -..   .    '■       —=—
A galeb duhr is permanently bound to the Material
Plane, so that when it dies, it doesn't return to the Plane
of Earth. It has an excellent memory and is more than
happy to share information regarding its environment
with creatures it doesn't regard as threats.
Stone Connection. A galeb duhr can become one with
the earth around it, allowing it to imbue nearby rocks
and boulders with a semblance of life. The galeb duhr
uses its animated boulders to frighten away interlopers
and defend whatever it has been charged to protect.;
When it needs to move close to those intruders, it
presses its limbs tight to its body and rolls fpi;ward at a
furious pace.
^m
^9r
139
=
Gargoyle
Medium elemental, chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      11 (+0)     16 (+3)       6 (-2)      11 (+0)      7 (-2)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons that aren't adamantine
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Terran
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
False Appearance. While the gargoyle remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from an inanimate statue.
Actions
Multiattack. The gargoyle makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its claws.
Site. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) slashing damage.
Gargoyle
The inanimate'gargoyles that perch atop great buildings
are inspired by these malevolent creatures of elemental
earth that resemble grotesque, fiendish statues. A
gargoyle lurks among masonry and ruins, as still as
any stone sculpture, and delights in the terror it creates
when it breaks from its suspended pose, as well as the
pain it inflicts on its victims.
Animate Stone. Gargoyles cling to rocky cliffs and
mountains, or roost on ledges in underground caves.
They haunt city rooftops, perching vulture-like among
the high stone arches and buttresses of castles and
cathedrals, and they can hold themselves so still that
they appear inanimate. Able to maintain this state for
years, a gargoyle makes an ideal sentry.
Deadly Reputation. Gargoyles have a reputation for
cruelty. Statues carved into the likenesses of gargoyles
appear in the architecture of countless cultures to
frighten away trespassers. Although such sculptures
are only decorative, real gargoyles can hide among
them to ambush unsuspecting victims. A gargoyle
might alleviate the tedium of its watch by catching
and tormenting birds or rodents, but its long wait only
increases its craving for harming sentient creatures.
Cruel Servants. Gargoyles are easily inspired by
the cunning of an intelligent master. They enjoy simple
tasks such as guarding a master's home, torturing
and killing interlopers, and anything else that involves
minimum effort and maximum pain and carnage.
Gargoyles sometimes serve demons for their
propensity for wanton chaos and destruction. Powerful
spellcasters can also easily enlist gargoyle guardians to
keep watch over their gates and walls. Gargoyles have
the patience and fortitude of stone, and will serve even
the crudest master for years without complaint.
Elemental Nature. A gargoyle doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
Ji_______________________________________________k.
Shards of Elemental Evil
As Ogremoch, the evil Prince of Elemental Earth, treads
his stony realm, it leaves shards of broken rock in his wake.
Imbued with slivers of sentience, these shards thrum with
the essence of the elemental prince, growing over long years
into vaguely humanoid rock formations that resolve at last
into the hard, cruel shapes of gargoyles.
Ogremoch doesn't create gargoyles deliberately, but
they are a physical manifestation of his evil. Gargoyles are
mockeries of the elemental air that Ogremoch despises. They
are heavy creatures of living stone, yet capable of flight. Like
their creator, they possess a fundamental hatred for beings
of elemental air, aarakocra in particular, and relish every
opportunity to destroy such creatures.
On their home plane, gargoyles carve out earth motes that
Ogremoch hurtles into Aaqa, the domain of the aarakocra
and the benevolent Wind Dukes the bird folk serve in the
Elemental Plane of Air.
14.0
_________
Genies
Genies are rare elemental creatures out of story
and legend. Only a few can be found on the Material
Plane. The rest reside on the Elemental Planes, where
they rule from lavish palaces and are attended by
worshipful slaves.
Genies are as brilliant as they are mighty, as proud
as they are majestic. Haughty and decadent, they have
a profound sense of entitlement that stems from the
knowledge that few creatures except the gods and other
genies can challenge their power.
Creatures of the Elements. A genie is born when
the soul of a sentient living creature melds with the
primordial matter of an elemental plane. Only under
rare circumstances does such an elemental-infused soul
coalesce into a manifest form and create a genie.
A genie usually retains no connection to the soul
that gave it form. That life force is a building block that
determines the genie's form and apparent gender, as
well as one or two key personality traits. Although they
resemble humanoid beings, genies are elemental spirits
given physical form. They don't mate with other genies
or produce genie offspring, as all new genies are born
out of the same mysterious fusion of spirit energy and
elemental power. A genie with a stronger connection
to its mortal soul might choose to sire a child with a
mortal, although such offspring are rare.
When a genie perishes, it leaves nothing behind
except what it was wearing or carrying, along with
a small trace of its native element: a pile of dust, a
gust of wind, a flash of fire and smoke, or a burst of
water and foam.
Rule or Be Ruled. Mortal slaves serve to validate
a genie's power and high self-opinion. A hundred
flattering voices are music to a genie's ears, while
two hundred mortal slaves prostrated at its feet are
proof that it is lord and master. Genies view slaves as
living property, and a genie without property amounts
to nothing among its own kind. As a result, many
genies treasure their slaves, treating them as honored
members of their households. Evil genies freely threaten
and abuse their slaves, but never to the extent that the
slaves are no longer of use.
In contrast to their love of slaves, most genies loathe
being bound to service themselves. A genie obeys the
will of another only when bribed or compelled by magic.
All genies command the power of their native element,
but a rare few also possess the power to grant wishes.
For both these reasons, mortal mages often seek to bind
genies into service.
Decadent Nobility. Noble genies are the rarest of
their kind. They are used to getting what they want,
and have learned to trade their ability to grant wishes
to attain the objects of their desire. This constant
indulgence has made them decadent, while their
supreme power over reality makes them haughty and
arrogant. Their vast palaces overflow with wonders and
sensory delights beyond imagination.
Noble genies cultivate the jealousy and envy of other
genies, asserting their superiority at every opportunity.
Other genies respect the influence of the noble genies,
knowing how unwise it is to defy a creature that can
alter reality at a whim. A genie isn't beholden to any
noble genie, however, and will sometimes choose to defy
a noble genie's will and risk the consequences.
The Power of Worship. Genies acknowledge the
gods as powerful entities but have no desire to cpurt
or worship them. They find the endless fawning and
mewling of religious devotees tiresome—except as it is
directed toward them by their worshipful slaves.
Their miraculous powers, the grandeur of Jheir
abodes, and the numbers of their slaves allow some
genies to deceive themselves into believing they^ar^e
as powerful as the gods. Some go so far as to demand
that mortals of other realms—even whole continents 0r
worlds—bow down before them.
Dap____________________________
Dao are greedy, malicious genies from the Elemental
Plane of Earth. They adorn themselves with jewelry
crafted from precious gems and rare metals, and when
they fly, their lower bodies become columns of swirling
sand. A dao isn't happy unless it is the envy of other dao.
All That Glitters. The dao dwell in complexes of
twisting tunnels and glittering ore-veined caverns
on the Elemental Plane of Earth. These mazeworks
are continually expanding as the dao delve into and
reshape the rock around them. Dao care nothing for
the poverty or misfortune of others. A dao might grind
powdered gems and gold dust over its food to heighten
the experience of eating, devouring its wealth as mortals
consume a precious spice.
Lords of the Earth. A dao never assists a mortal
unless the genie has something to gain, preferably
treasure. Among the genies, dao are on speaking and
trading terms with the efreet, but they have nothing
but scorn for djinn and marids. Other races native to
the Elemental Plane of Earth avoid the dao, which are
always seeking new slaves to mine the mazeworks of
their floating earth islands.
Proud Slavers. The dao trade for the finest slaves
that money can buy, forcing them to work in dangerous
subterranean realms that rumble with earthquakes.
As much as they enjoy enslaving others, the dao
hate being enslaved. Powerful wizards have been
known to lure dao to the Material Plane and trap them
in the confines of magic gemstones or iron flasks.
Unfortunately for the dao, their greed makes it relatively
easy for mages to cozen them into service.
DjINNI________________________________________
Proud, sensuous genies from the Elemental Plane
of Air, the djinn are attractive, tall, well-muscled
humanoids with blue skin and dark eyes. They dress in
airy, shimmering silks, designed as much for comfort as
to flaunt their musculature.
Airy Aesthetes. Djinn rule floating islands of
cloudstuff covered with enormous pavilions, or topped
with wondrous buildings, courtyards, fountains, and
gardens. Creatures of comfort and ease, djinn enjoy
succulent fruits, pungent wines, fine perfumes, and
beautiful music.
Djinn are known for their sense of mischief and their
favorable attitude toward mortals. Among genies, djinn
deal coolly with efreet and marids, whom they view as '
haughty. They openly despise dao and strike against
them with little provocation.
Masters of the Wind. Masters of the air, the djinn ride
powerful whirlwinds that they create and direct on a
whim, and which can even carry passengers. Creatures
that stand against a djinni are assaulted by wind and
thunder, even as the djinni spins away on that wind if
outmatched in combat. When a djinni flies, its lower
body transforms into a column of swirling air.
Accepting Servitors. The djinn believe that servitude
is a matter of fate, and that no being can contest the
hand of fate. As a result, of all the genies, djinn are the
ones most amenable to servitude, though they never
enjoy it. Djinn treat their slaves more like servants
deserving of kindness and protection, and they part with
them reluctantly.
A mortal who desires the brief service of a djinni can
entreat it with fine gifts, or use flattery to bribe it into
compliance. Powerful wizards are able to forgo such
niceties, however, if they can summon, bind into service,
or imprison a djinni using magic. Long-term service
displeases a djinni, and imprisonment is inexcusable.
Djinn resent the cruel wizards that have imprisoned
their kind in bottles, iron flasks, and wind instruments
throughout the ages. Betrayal, particularly by a mortal
whom a djinni trusted, is a vile deed that only deadly
vengeance can amend.
Efreeti
Hulking genies of the Elemental Plane of Fire, the efreet
are masters of flame, immune to fire and able to create
it on a whim. Fine silk caftans and damask robes drape
their magma-red or coal-black skin, and they bedeck
themselves in brass and gold tores, chains, and rings,
all glittering with jewels. When an efreeti flies, its lower
body transforms into a column of smoke and embers.
Haughty and Cruel. The efreet are deceptive,
' cunning, and cruel to the point of ruthlessness. They
despise being forced into servitude and are relentless
in pursuit of vengeance against creatures that have
wronged them. Efreet don't see themselves in this light,
naturally, and regard their race as fair and orderly, even
as they admit to an enlightened sense of self-interest.
Spiteful Slavers. Efreet view all other creatures
as enemies or potential serfs. They raid the Material
Plane and the elemental planes for slaves, which they
capture and bring back to their homes on the Elemental
Plane of Fire. The efreet rule as oppressive tyrants,
promoting only the crudest among their slaves. Those
overseers are given whips to help keep the rank-and-file
slaves in line.
Planar Raiders. Most efreet reside on the Elemental
Plane of Fire, either in great domed fortresses of black
glass and basalt surrounded by churning lakes of fire, or
in the fabled City of Brass. Additionally, efreet military
outposts thronging with their minions and slaves can be
found scattered throughout the planes.
On the Material Plane, efreet dwell in fiery regions
such as volcanoes and the burning expanses of the
world's deserfs. Their love of the dfesertti'^jfigs'them into
conflict with the djinn that ride the desert whirlwinds,
and with the earthbound dao. Efreet utterly despise
marids, with whom they have maintained a passionate
conflict throughout the history of both races.
Marid____________________________
Hailing from the Elemental Plane of Water, the marids
are the most wondrous of genie-kind. Although all
genies wield great power, even the lowliest marid sees
itself as clearly superior to the flighty djinn, the ground-
hugging dao, and the fuming efreet.
Large and piscine, marids are a strange sight to
behold, particularly when clad in the finely stitched vests
and colorful pantaloons they favor. They speak in voices
as soft as the sea breeze or as sonorous as storm waves
breaking against a rocky cliff. In flight, their lower
bodies transform into columns of foamy water.
Water Lords. Water is a marid's native element,
and the genie can manipulate water in virtually any
way it desires. A marid can walk on water and breathe
naturally beneath its surface. It can create water or
shape clouds of fog and mist from the vapor in the air.
It can even transform itself into mist, or use water as a
weapon to bludgeon its foes.
Marid Homes. Marids are rare on the Material Plane.
They inhabit mighty and majestic coral fortresses
located in the Elemental Plane of Water. These citadels
float in the depths of the plane and contain opulent, air-
filled chambers where slaves and guests reside.
A marid doesn't expect much from its slaves, simply
wanting to have them for the status of ownership.
Marids go out of their way to obtain skilled slaves, and
aren't above kidnapping mortal artists, entertainers, or
storytellers for use in their courts.
Egotistical Hierarchs. All marids claim a title of
nobility, and the race is awash in shahs, sultans, muftis,
and khedives. Most of these titles are mere pretense on
the part of the self-important marids.
Marids treat all others—including other genies—as
inferiors of various grades, ranging from poor cousins to
petty annoyances. They tolerate djinn, dislike dao, and
despise efreet.
Humanoids are among the lowest of the creatures
that marids must tolerate, although they sometimes
deal with powerful wizards and exceptional leaders
on an almost-equal footing. Doing so has sometimes
proven to be a mistake, since wizards have managed to
imprison marids in conch shells, flasks, and decanters
over the ages. Bribery and flattery are the best means of
dealing with marids, to which an obsequious mortal is a
creature that knows its place.
Whimsical Storytellers. Marids are champion tale-
tellers, whose favorite legends emphasize the prowess
of marids in general and of the speaker in particular.
Fanciful genies, they lie often and creatively. They aren't
always malicious in their deception, but embellishments
suit their fancy. Marids consider it a crime for a lesser
being to interrupt one of their tales, and offending a
marid is a sure way to invoke its wrath.

1^1
QflNlgs
„ THE GREAT D.SMAlDELVE, GEM
WELCOME TO THE fa"                      ^ ^^
OF THE INNER P^NESe                KHATUN ZAFAM
AL-Y,L J.N ZARA.N, Si                                CATHEDRAL.
DEPTHS, PONT.FF O  JH                             ^ ftN0
PROTECTOR OP THE MALACH.T
5o:NGro5:;:ER::scHAL, r^.r--r
«-
Dao
Large elemental, neutral evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 187 (15dl0+105)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      12 (+1)      24 (+7)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)
Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +5, Cha +6
Condition Immunities petrified
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Terran
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
Earth Glide. The dao can burrow through nonmagical,
unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the dao doesn't
disturb the material it moves through.
Elemental Demise. If the dao dies, its body disintegrates into
crystalline powder, leaving behind only equipment the dao was
wearing or carrying.
Innate Spellcasting. The dao's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). It
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
components:
At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, stone shape
3/day each: passwall, move earth, tongues
1/day each: conjure elemental (earth elemental only), gaseous
form, invisibility, phantasmal killer, plane shift, wall of stone
Sure-Footed. The dao has advantage on Strength and Dexterity
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone.
Actions
Multiattack. The dao makes two fist attacks or two
maul attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Maul. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (4d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a Huge
or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 18 Strength check
or be knocked prone.
w.i a^ju-
-- - -
'•""-»•+
143
Variant: Genie Powers
Genies have a variety of magical capabilities, including spells.
A few have even greater powers that allow them to alter their
appearance or the nature of reality.
Disguises. Some genies can veil themselves in illusion to
pass as other similarly shaped creatures. Such genies can
innately cast the disguise self spell at will, often with a longer
duration than is normal for that spell. Mightier genies can
cast the true polymorph spell one to three times per day,
possibly with a longer duration than normal. Such genies can
change only their own shape, but a rare few can use the spell
on other creatures and objects as well.
Wishes. The genie power to grant wishes is legendary
among mortals. Only the most potent genies, such as those
among the nobility, can do so. A particular genie that has this
power can grant one to three wishes to a creature that isn't
a genie. Once a genie has granted its limit of wishes, it can't
grant wishes again for some amount of time (usually 1 year),
and cosmic law dictates that the same genie can expend
its limit of wishes on a specific creature only once in that
creature's existence.
To be granted a wish, a creature within 60 feet of the genie
states a desired effect to it. The genie can then cast the
wish spell on the creature's behalf to bring about the effect.
Depending on the genie's nature, the genie might try to
pervert the intent of the wish by exploiting the wish's poor
wording. The perversion of the wording is usually crafted to
be to the genie's benefit.
Djinni
Large elemental, chaotic good
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 161 (14dl0 + 84)
Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)      15 (+2)      22 (+6)      15 (+2)     16 (+3)      20 (+5)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +7, Cha +9
Damage Immunities lightning, thunder
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Auran
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
Elemental Demise. If the djinni dies, its body disintegrates into
a warm breeze, leaving behind only equipment the djinni was
I wearing or carrying.
J Innate Spellcasting. The djinni's innate spellcasting ability
is Charisma (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit with spell attacks). It
I can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
J components:
I At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, thunderwave
i  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -                                -
3/day each: create food and water (can create wine instead of
water), tongues, wind walk
1/day each: conjure elemental (air elemerital only), creation,
gaseous form, invisibility, major image, plane shift
Actions
Multiattack. The djinni makes three scimitar attacks.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 3 (ld6) lightning
or thunder damage (djinni's choice).
Create Whirlwind. A 5-foot-radius, 30-foot-tall cylinder of
swirling air magically forms on a point the djinni can see
within 120 feet of it. The whirlwind lasts as long as the djinni
maintains concentration (as if concentrating on a spell). Any
creature but the djinni that enters the whirlwind must succeed
on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be restrained by it. The
djinni can move the whirlwind up to 60 feet as an action,
and creatures restrained by the whirlwind move with it. The
whirlwind ends if the djinni loses sight of it.
A creature can use its action to free a creature restrained
by the whirlwind, including itself, by succeeding on a DC
18 Strength check. If the check succeeds, the creature is no
longer restrained and moves to the nearest space outside the
whirlwind.
144
GKNlJES


Efreeti
Large elemental, lawful evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 200 (16dl0+112)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)      12 (+1)      24 (+7)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)      16 (+3)
I Saving Throws Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +7
Damage Immunities fire
J Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
LanguagesIgnan
.Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
.   |^M t
Elemental Demise. If the efreeti dies, its body disintegrates in a
! flash of fire and puff of smoke, leaving behind only equipment
the efreeti was wearing or carrying.
Innate Spellcasting. The efreeti's innate spellcasting ability
is Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). It
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
components:
At will: detect magic
3/day: enlarge/reduce, tongues
1/day each: conjure elemental (fire elemental only), gaseous
form, invisibility, major image, plane shift, wall of fire
Actions
Multiattack. The efreeti makes two scimitar attacks or uses its
Hurl Flame twice.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6)
fire damage.
Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (5d6) fire damage.
:^s^^
=
fc^SH.     ■.■V-1^^-~JI
143
^uP^6'      -K^08*     P«.eto«°F
14.6



Marid
£arge elemental, chaotic neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 229 (17dl0+136)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 90 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)      12 (+1)      26 (+8)      18 (+4)     17 (+3)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +7, Cha +8
Damage Resistances acid, cold, lightning
' Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft.,
passive Perception 13
Languages Aquan
I Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
Amphibious. The marid can breathe air and water.
Elemental Demise. If the marid dies, its body disintegrates into
a burst of water and foam, leaving behind only equipment the
marid was wearing or carrying.
Innate Spellcasting. The marid's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with spell attacks). It
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
components:
At will: create or destroy water, detect evil and good, detect
magic, fog cloud, purify food and drink
3/day each: tongues, water breathing, water walk
1/day each: conjure elemental (water elemental only), control
water, gaseous form, invisibility, plane shift
Actions
Multiattack. The marid makes two trident attacks.
Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5
ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) piercing
damage, or 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage if used with two
hands to make a melee attack.
Water Jet. The marid magically shoots water in a 60-foot line
that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC
16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failure, a target takes 21 (6d6)
bludgeoning damage and, if it is Huge or smaller, is pushed
up to 20 feet away from the marid and knocked prone. On a
success, a target takes half the bludgeoning damage, but is
neither pushed nor knocked prone.


gySNl^s
J

Ghost
A ghost is the soul of a once-living creature, bound to
haunt a specific location, creature, or object that held
significance to it in its life.
Unfinished Business. A ghost yearns to complete
some unresolved task from its life. It might seek to
avenge its own death, fulfill an oath, or relay a message
to a loved one. A ghost might not realize that it has died
and continue the everyday routine of its life. Others
are driven by wickedness or spite, as with a ghost that
refuses to rest until every member of a certain family or
organization is dead.
The surest way to rid an area of a ghost is to resolve
its unfinished business. A ghost can be destroyed more
easily by invoking a weakness tied to its former life.
The ghost of a person tortured to death might be killed
agajn by the implements of that torture. The ghost of a
gardener might become more vulnerable when exposed
to a potent floral fragrance.
Ghostly Manifestations. Sensations of profound
sadness, loneliness, and unfulfilled yearning emanate
from places where ghostly hauntings occur. Strange
sounds or unnatural silences create an unsettling
atmosphere. Cold spots settle in rooms that have
roaring fires. A choking stench might seep into the area,
inanimate objects might move of their own accord, and
corpses might rise from the grave. The ghost has no
control over these manifestations; they simply occur.
Undead Nature. A ghost doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Ghost
Medium undead, any alignment
, Armor Class 11
Hit Points 45 (10d8)
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
7 (-2)       13 (+1)      10 (+0)      10 (+0)     12 (+1)      17 (+3)
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
1 Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages any languages it knew in life
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Ethereal Sight. The ghost can see 60 feet into the Ethereal
Plane when it is on the Material Plane, and vice versa.
Incorporeal Movement. The ghost can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(ldlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
, Actions
Withering Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 17 (4d6 + 3) necrotic damage.
Etherealness. The ghost enters the Ethereal Plane from the
I Material Plane, or vice versa. It is visible on the Material Plane
while it is in the Border Ethereal, and vice, versa, yet it ean!J
affect or be affected by anything on the other plane.
Horrifying Visage. Each non-undead creature within 60 feet
of the ghost that can see it must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. If the save fails by
5 or more, the target also ages 1 d4 x 10 years. A frightened
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the frightened condition on itself on a success.
If a target's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the target is immune to this ghost's Horrifying Visage for the
next 24 hours. The aging effect can be reversed with a greater
restoration spell, but only within 24 hours of it occurring.
Possession (Recharge 6). One humanoid that the ghost can see
within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 13 Charisma saving
throw or be possessed by the ghost; the ghost then disappears,
and the target is incapacitated and loses control of its body.
The ghost now controls the body but doesn't deprive the target
of awareness. The ghost can't be targeted by any attack, spell,
or other effect, except ones that turn undead, and it retains its
alignment, Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma, and immunity to
being charmed and frightened. It otherwise uses the possessed
target's statistics, but doesn't gain access to the target's
knowledge, class features, or proficiencies.
The possession lasts until the body drops to 0 hit points,
the ghost ends it as a bonus action, or the ghost is turned or
forced out by an effect like the dispel evil and good spell. When
the possession ends, the ghost reappears in an unoccupied
space within 5 feet of the body. The target is immune to this
ghost's Possession for 24 hours after succeeding on the saving
throw or after the possession ends.
r\
-
'.
uk av.-gB.aB'
-.■manjaa. -.-ag
147
Ghast
Medium undead, chaotic 6vil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 36 (gdg)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX
17 (+3)
CON
10 (+0)
INT          WIS
11 (+0)     10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)
Damage Resistances necrotic
} Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Stench. Any creature that starts its turn within 5 feet of the
ghast must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or
be poisoned until the start of its next turn. On a successful
saving throw, the creature is immune to the ghast's Stench
for 24 hours.
Turning Defiance. The ghast and any ghouls within 30 feet
of it have advantage on saving throws against effects that
turn undead.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. If the target is a creature
other than an undead, it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution
I saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
I the effect on itself on a success.
Ghouls
Ghouls roam the night in packs, driven by an insatiable
hunger for humanoid flesh.
Devourers of Flesh. Like maggots or carrion
beetles, ghouls thrive in places rank with decay and
death. A ghoul haunts a place where it can gorge on
dead flesh and decomposing organs. When it can't
feed on the dead, it pursues living creatures and
attempts to make corpses of them. Though they gain
no nourishment from the corpses they devour, ghouls
are driven by an unending hunger that compels them
to consume. A ghoul's undead flesh never rots, and this
monster can persist in a crypt or tomb for untold ages
without feeding.
Abyssal Origins. Ghouls trace their origins to the
Abyss. Doresain, the first of their kind, was an elf
worshiper of Orcus. Turning against his own people, he
feasted on humanoid flesh to honor the Demon Prince of
Undeath. As a reward for his service, Orcus transformed
Doresain into the first ghoul. Doresain served Orcus
faithfully in the Abyss, creating ghouls from the demon
lord's other servants until an incursion by Yeenoghu,
the demonic Gnoll Lord, robbed Doresain of his abyssal
domain. When Orcus would not intervene on his behalf,
Doresain turned to the elf gods for salvation, and
they took pity on him and helped him escape certain
destruction. Since then, elves have been immune to the
ghouls' paralytic touch.
Ghasts. Orcus sometimes infuses a ghoul with
a stronger dose of abyssal energy, making a ghast.
Whereas ghouls are little more than savage beasts, a
ghast is cunning and can inspire a pack of ghouls to
follow its commands.
E=
-   -                                  1
Ghoul
Medium undead, chaotic evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      15 (+2)      10 (+0)       7 (-2)      10 (+0)      6 (-2)
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Actions

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. If the target is a creature
other than an elf or undead, it must succeed on a DC 10
Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.

E=
*-.-■'•-'»>■"-'*■.J--             _-   .--^astpiBi
us
PHOVLS
Giants
Ancient empires once cast long shadows over a world
that quaked beneath the giants' feet. In those lost days,
these towering figures were dragon slayers, dreamers,
crafters, and kings, but their kind fell from glory long
ago. However, even divided among secluded clans
scattered throughout the world, the giants maintain the
customs and traditions of old.
Old as Legend. In remote regions of the world,
the last remaining plinths, monoliths, and statues of
the great giant empires bow their heads in desolate
obscurity. Where once those empires sprawled
across all lands, now the giants dwell in isolated
tribes and clans.
Giants are almost as old as dragons, which were
still young when the giants' heavy feet first shook the
foundations of the world. As they spread across new
lands, giants and dragons fought bitter generational
wars that nearly brought both sides low. No living giant
remembers what started the conflict, but myths and
tales of their race's glorious dawn are still sung in their
Steadings and holdfasts, vilifying the primeval wyrms.
Giants and dragons continue to harbor grudges against
one another, and it is seldom that they will meet or
occupy the same area without a fight.
The Ordning_____________________
Each of the main giant races—the cloud, fire, frost,
hill, stone, and storm giants—are related by common
elements of history, religion, and culture. They view one
another as kindred, keeping any inherent animosity over
territory and ambition to a minimum.
Giants belong to a caste structure called the ordning.
Based on social class and highly organized, the ordning
assigns a social rank to each giant. By understanding
its place in the ordning, a giant knows which other
giants are inferior or superior to it, since no two giants
are equal. Each of the giant races analyzes a different
combination of skills or qualities to determine the
ordning. Giants make excelling in these qualities the
purpose of their lives.
At the highest level of the ordning, the races of the
giants are also ranked according to status. Storm giants
are the highest in the ordning, followed by cloud giants,
fire giants, frost giants, stone giants, hill giants, and
finally giant kin such as fomorians, ettins, and ogres.
Regardless of a giant's rank among its own race, the
chief of a hill giant tribe is inferior to the most common
of stone giants. The lowest ranked giant of any type is
superior to the highest ranked giant of an inferior type.
It isn't considered evil to disrespect or even betray a
giant of another type, merely rude.
c »«AILED OUR WAULS AND CAST
BOUU0E!N   " AV.2 *PS THROUGH WH.CH
THEMOO-N.LEAVW   •                       hano.
THE e,ANTs „■«-.*; dw6rn BRrt^...
,«F SIEGE OF StERNGATE
pART1AL ACCOUNT OP THE S.EG
?(|jI;oud BjaMt?
Qloud giants live extravagant lives high above the world,
showing little concern for the plights of other races
except as amusement. They are muscular with light skin
and have hair of silver or blue.
High and Mighty. Cloud giants are spread to the
Winds, encompassing vast areas of the world. In times
of need, scattered cloud giant families band together as
,a unified clan. However, they can seldom do so quickly.
Attuned to the magic of their airy domains, cloud
giants are able to turn into mist and create clouds of
billowing fog. They dwell in castles on high mountain
peaks, or on the solid clouds that once held their fiefs.
Still gracing the skies on occasion, these magic clouds
are a lasting remnant of the giants' lost empires.
Better spellcasters than most other giants, some cloud
giants can control weather, bring storms, and steer the
wind almost as well as their cousins, the storm giants.
Affluent Princes. Although cloud giants are lower
in the ordning than storm giants, the reclusive storm
giants rarely engage with the rest of giantkind. As a
result, many cloud giants see themselves as having
the highest status and power among the giant races.
They order lesser giants to seek out wealth and art
on their behalf, employing fire giants as smiths and
crafters, and using frost giants as reavers, raiders, and
plunderers. Dimwitted hill giants serve them as brutes
and combat fodder—sometimes fighting for the cloud
giants' amusement. A cloud giant might order hill or
frost giants to steal from nearby humanoid lands, which
.it considers to be a fair tax for its continued beneficence.
On their mountain summits and solid clouds, cloud
^giants keep extraordinary gardens. Grapes as big
JS& apples grow there, along with apples the size of
pumpkins, and pumpkins the size of wagons. From
(he errant seeds of these gardens, tales of cottage-
sized produce and magic beans are spread in the
mortal realm.
As humanoid nobles keep an aerie for hunting hawks,
,'so do cloud giants keep griffons, perytons, and wyverns
as their own flying beasts of prey. Such creatures also
patrol the cloud giants' gardens by night, along with
trained predators such as owlbears and lions.
Children of the Trickster. The patron god and
father of the cloud giants is Memnor the Trickster, the
cleverest and slyest of the giant deities. Cloud giants
align themselves according to the aspects and exploits
of Memnor that they most admire, with evil cloud
giants emulating his deceitfulness and self-interest and
good cloud giants emulating his intellect and silver-
tongued speech. Family members usually align in the
same direction.
Wealth and Power. A cloud giant earns its place in
the ordning by the treasure it accumulates, the wealth
it wears, and the gifts it bestows on other cloud giants.
However, value is only one part of the assessment. The
extravagances a cloud giant wears or places about its
home must also be beautiful or wondrous. Sacks of gold
or gems are worth less to a cloud giant than the jewelry
that might be crafted from those materials, creating
treasures that bring esteem to a cloud giant's household.
Rather than steal from one another or fight over
treasures, cloud giants are inveterate gamblers with a
hunger for high risks and high rewards. They frequently
bet on the outcome of events nominally outside their
control, such as the lives of lesser creatures. Ordning
ranks and kings' ransoms can be won and lost in bets
over the military triumphs of humanoid nations. Fixing
wagers by interfering in the conflict causes the loss of
the bet, but such deceit is considered to be cheating
only if it is discovered. Otherwise, it is cleverness
honoring Memnor.
Fire Giant____________________,
Master crafters and organized warriors, fire giants
dwell among volcanoes, lava floes, and rocky mountains.
They are ruthless militaristic brutes whose mastery of
metalwork is legendary.
Fire Forged. Fire giant fortresses are built around
and inside volcanoes or near magma-filled caverns.
The blistering heat of their homes fuels the fire giants'
forges, and causes the iron of their fortress walls to
glow a comforting orange. In lands far removed from
volcanic heat, fire giants mine coal to burn. Traditional
smithies occupy places of honor in their demesnes, and
the giants' stony fortresses constantly belch plumes of
sooty smoke. In more remote outposts, fire giants burn
wood to keep their forge fires lit, deforesting leagues of
land in all directions.
Storm Giant Boulder
Fife giants shun cold as much as their cousins
the frost giants hate heat. They can adapt to cold
environments with effort, though, keeping their hearth
fires burning bright and wearing heavy woolen clothing
and furs to stay warm.
Martial Experts. From birth, a fire giant is taught
to embrace a legacy of war. At the cradle, its parents
chant songs of battle. As children, fire giants play at
war, hurling igneous rocks at one another across the
►   banks of magma rivers. In later years, formal martial
training becomes an integral part of life in the giants'
fortresses and underground realms of smoke and ash.
The fire giants' songs are odes of battles lost and won,
while their dances are martial formations of pounding
feet that resound like smiths' hammers throughout their
smoky halls.
Just as fire giants pass down their knowledge of
crafting from generation to generation, their renowned
fighting prowess comes not from wild fury but from
endless discipline and training. Enemies make the
mistake of underestimating fire giants based on their
brutish manner, learning too late that these giants live
for combat and can be shrewd tacticians.
Feudal Lords. Humanoids conquered in war become
serfs to the fire giants. The serfs work the farms and
fields on the outskirts of fire giant halls and fortresses,
raising livestock and harvesting fields whose bounty is
almost entirely tithed to the fire giant kings.
Fire giant crafters work through insight and
experience rather than writing or arithmetic. Though
most fire giants place little worth on such frivolousness,
they sometimes keep slaves at court who are versed
in such skills. Serfs not destined for court or the
fields (especially dwarves) are taken to the fire giants'
mountainous realms to mine ore and gemstones from
deep within the earth.
Fire giants low in the ordning manage the mine
tunnels and the slaves that toil there, few of which
survive the difficult and dangerous work for long.
Though fire giants are skilled in the engineering of
mine tunnels and the gathering of ore, they place
less importance on the safety of their slaves than on
smelting and working the bounty those slaves produce.
Skilled Artisans. Fire giants have a fearsome
reputation as soldiers and conquerors, and for their
ability to burn, plunder, and destroy. Yet among the
giants, fire giants produce the greatest crafters and
artists. They excel at smelting and smith work, as they
do at the engineering of metal and stone, and the quality
of their artistry shows even in their implements of
destruction and their weapons of war.
Fire giants strive to build the strongest fortresses and
most potent siege weapons. They experiment with alloys
to create the hardest armor, then forge the swords that
can pierce it. Such work requires brawn and brains in
equal measure, and fire giants high in the ordning tend
to be the smartest and strongest of their kind.
r •» " Hi BOVNT,E0ANGERROTH THE BARBARIAN "" *™»" T„E GIANT
t           NES ARE UN0ER ™<" BOULDER OVER THERE •                  *""
-ElDER Zelane of IsTlvlN;RicouNT1NG the Giant
Frost Giant__________
-------------■------------------                     '     .   ■   '!  :'  '• • f ,' Hffl
Gigantic reavers from the freezing lands beyond
civilization, frost giants are fierce, hardy warriors
that survive on the spoils of their raids and pillaging.
They respect only brute strength and skill in battie,
demonstrating both with their scars and the grisly
trophies they take from their enemies.
Hearts of Ice. Frost giants are creatures of jce and
snow. Their hair and beards are pale white or light blue,
matted with frost and clattering with icicles. Their flesh
is as blue as glacial ice.
Frost giants dwell in high peaks and glacial^lrts'
where the sun hides its golden head by winter. Crops
don't grow in their frozen homelands, and they keep
little livestock beyond what they capture in their-raids
against civilized lands. They hunt the wild game of the
tundra and mountains but don't cook it, since meat from
a fresh kill tastes sufficiently hot to their palate.
Reavers of the Storm. The war horns of the frost
giants howl as they march from their ice fortresses
and glacial rifts amid the howling blizzard. When that
storm clears, villages and steadings lay in ruins, ravens
descending to feed on the corpses of any creatures
foolish or unlucky enough to stand in the giants' path.
Inns and taverns suffer the brunt of the damage,
their cellars gutted and their casks of ale and mead
gone. Smithies are likewise toppled, their iron and
steel claimed. Curiously undisturbed are the houses
of moneylenders and wealthy citizens, for the reavers
have little use for coins or baubles. Frost giants prize
gems and jewelry large enough to be worn and noticed.
However, even those treasures are most often saved for
trading opportunities with other giants more adept at
crafting metal weapons and armor.
Rulers by Might. Frost giants respect brute strength
above all else, and a frost giant's place in the ordning
depends on evidence of physical might, such as superior
musculature, scars from battles of renown, or trophies
fashioned from the bodies of slain enemies. Tasks such
as hunting, childrearing, and crafting are given to giants
based on their physical strength and hardiness.
When frost giants of different clans meet and their
status is unclear, they wrestle for dominance. Such
meetings might resemble festivals where giants cheer
on their champions, making bold boasts and challenges.
At other times, the informal ceremony can become a
chaotic free-for-all where both clans rush into a melee
that fells trees, shatters the ice on frozen lakes, and
causes avalanches on the snowy mountainsides.
Make War, Not Goods. Though frost giants consider
the menial crafting of goods beneath them, carving and
leatherwork are valued skills. They make their clothing
from the skins and bones of beasts, and carve bone or
ivory into jewelry and the handles of weapons and tools.
They reuse the weapons and armor of their smaller foes,
stringing shields into scale armor and lashing sword
blades to wooden hafts to make giant-sized spears. The
greatest battle trophies come from conquered dragons,,
and the greatest frost giant jarls wear armor of dragoij.
scales or wield picks and mauls made of a dragon's
teeth or claws.
I5r
Hill Giant
W'"
4
Hill giants are selfish, dimwitted brutes that hunt,
forage, and raid in constant search of food. They blunder
through hills and forests devouring what they can,
bullying smaller creatures into feeding them. Their
laziness and dullness would long ago have spelled their
end if not for their formidable size and strength.
Primitive. Hill giants dwell in hills and mountain
valleys across the world, congregating in steadings built
of rough timber or in clusters of well-defended mud-
and-wattle huts. Their skins are tan from lives spent
lumbering up and down the hilly slopes and dozing
beneath the sun. Their weapons are uprooted trees and
rocks pulled from the earth. The sweat of their bodies
adds to the reek of the crude animal skins they wear,
poorly stitched together with hair and leather thongs.
Bigger Means Better. In a hill giant's world,
humanoids and animals are easy prey that can be
hunted with impunity. Creatures such as dragons and
other giants are tough adversaries. Hill giants equate
size with power.
Hill giants don't realize they follow an ordning. They
know only that other giants are larger and stronger than
they are, which means they are to be obeyed. A hill giant
tribe's chief is usually the tallest and fattest giant that
can still move about. Only on rare occasion does a hill
giant with more brains than bulk use its cunning to gain
the favor of giants of higher status, cleverly subverting
the social order.
Voracious Eaters. With nothing else to occupy them,
hill giants eat as often as possible. A hill giant hunts and
forages alone or with a dire wolf companion, so as to not
have to share with other tribe members. The giant eats
anything that isn't obviously deadly, such as creatures
known to be poisonous. Rotten meat is fair game,
though, as are decaying plants and even mud.
Farmers fear and loathe hill giants. Where a predator
such as an ankheg might burrow through fields and
consume a cow or two before being driven off, a hill
giant will consume a whole herd of cattle before moving
on to sheep, goats, and chickens, then tearing into fruits,
vegetables, and grain. If a farm family is at hand, the
giant might snack on them too.
Stupid and Deadly. The hill giants' ability to digest
nearly anything has allowed them to survive for eons as
savages, eating and breeding in the hills like animals.
They have never needed to adapt and change, so their
minds and emotions remain simple and undeveloped.
With no culture of their own, hill giants ape the
traditions of creatures they manage to observe for
a time before eating them. They don't think about
their own size and strength, however. Tribes of hill
giants attempting to imitate elves have been known to
topple entire forests by trying to live in trees. Others
attempting to take over humanoid towns or villages
get only as far as the doors and windows of a building,
taking out its walls and roof as they attempt to enter.
In conversation, hill giants are blunt and direct, and
they have little concept of deception. A hill giant might
be fooled into running from another giant if a number of
villagers cover themselves in blankets and stand on one
anothef's^Houitiers holding a giaftPpainted pumpkin
head. Reasoning with a hill giant is futile, although
clever creatures can sometimes encourage a giant to
take actions that benefit them.
Raging Bullies. A hill giant that feels as though it
has been deceived, insulted, or made into a fool vents
its terrible wrath on anything it encounters. Even after
smashing those who offended it into pulp, the giant
rampages until its rage abates, it notices something
more interesting, or it grows hungry.
If a hill giant proclaims itself king over a territory
where other humanoids live, it rules strictly by terror
and tyranny. Its decisions shift with its mood, and if it
forgets the title it bestowed upon itself, it might eat its
subjects on a whim.
Stone Giant______
Stone giants are reclusive, quiet, and peaceful as long
as they are left alone. Their granite-gray skin, gaunt
features, and black, sunken eyes endow stone giants
with a stern countenance. They are private creatures,
hiding their lives and art away from the world.
Inhabitants of a Stone World. Secluded caves are
the homes of the stone giants. Cavern networks are
their towns, rocky tunnels their roads, and underground
streams their waterways. Isolated mountain ranges are
their continents, with the vast spans of land between
seen as oceans that the stone giants only rarely cross.
In their dark, quiet caves, stone giants wordlessly
chip away at elaborate carvings, measuring time in
the echoing drip of water into cavern pools. In the
deepest chambers of a stone giant settlement, far from
the chittering of bats or the patrols paced out by the
giants' cave bear companions, are holy places where
silence and darkness are complete. Stone takes on its
most sacred quality in these cavern cathedrals, their   '
buttresses and columns carved with a beauty that
shames the legendary stonecraft of the dwarves.
Carvers and Seers. Among stone giants, artistry
ranks as the greatest virtue. They create intricate
murals, paint sprawling murals across cavern walls, and
indulge in a wide variety of other artistic disciplines.
They esteem stone carving as the greatest of skills.
• Stone giants strive to draw shapes out of raw stone,
which they believe reveal meaning inspired by their god,
Skoraeus Stonebones. The giants appoint the tribe's
best carvers as their leaders, shamans, and prophets.
The holy hands of such giants become the hands of the
god as they work.
Graceful Athletes. Despite their great size and
musculature, stone giants are lithe and graceful. Skilled
rock throwers are granted positions of high rank in the
giants' ordning, testing and demonstrating their ability
to hurl and catch enormous boulders. Such giants take
the front ranks when a tribe has cause to defend its
home or attack its enemies. However, even in combat,
artistry is key. A stone giant hurling a rock performs
not just a feat of brute strength but also one of stunning
athleticism and poise.
Dreamers under Sky. Stone giants view the world
outside their underground homes as a realm of dreams
where nothing is entirely true or real. They behave in



152
the Surface world the way humanoids might behave
in their own dreams, making little account for their
actions and never fully trusting what they see or hear. A
promise made above ground need not be kept. Insults
can be made without apology. Killing prey or sentient
beings is no cause for guilt in the dreaming world
beneath the sky.
Stone giants lacking in athletic grace or artistic skill
dwell at the fringes of their society, serving as the tribe's
outlying guardians and far-wandering hunters. When
trespassers stray too far into the mountain territory of a
stone giant clan, those guardians greet them with hurled
rocks and showers of splintered stone. Survivors of such
encounters spread tales of stone giant violence, never
realizing how little those brutes dwelling in the unreal
dreaming world resemble their quiet and artistic kin.
Storm Giant_____________________
Storm giants are contemplative seers that live in places
far removed from mortal civilization. Most have pale
purple-gray skin and hair, and glittering emerald eyes.
Some rare storm giants are violet-skinned, with deep
violet or blue-black hair and silvery gray or purple
^__________________________________________Ik.
i Giant Cods
When the giants' ancient empires fell, Annam, father of all
giants, forsook his children and the world. He swore never to
| look upon either again until the giants had returned to their
glory and reclaimed their birthright as rulers of the world. As
a result, giants pray not to Annam but to his divine children,
along with a host of hero-deities and godly villains that make
up the giants' pantheon.
Chief among these gods are the children of Annam, whose
sons represent each type of giant: Stronmaus for storm
giants, Memnor for cloud giants, Skoraeus Stonebones for
stone giants, Thrym for frost giants, Surtur for fire giants,
and Crolantorfor hill giants. Not all giants automatically
revere their kind's primary deity, however. Many good cloud
giants refuse to worship the deceitful Memnor, and a storm
giant dwelling in the icy mountains of the north might pay
more homage to Thrym than Stronmaus. Other giants feel
a stronger connection to Annam's daughters, who include
Hiatea, the huntress and home warden; lallanis, goddess
of love and peace; and Diancastra, an impetuous and
arrogant trickster.
Some giants abandon their own gods and fall prey to
demon cults, paying homage to Baphomet or Kostchtchie.
To worship them or any other non-giant deity is a great
sin against the ordning, and almost certain to make a
giant an outcast.
^yimnuninu.LLi.1111.1  i    ji i-iiii   ii    m iiiiju-   u n_iijl.....iiu i       p
eyes. They are benevolent and wise unless angered, in
response to which the fury of a storm giant can affect
the fate of thousands.
Distant Prophet-Kings. Storm giants live in isolated
refuges so far above the surface of the world or below
the sea that they are beyond the reach of most other
creatures. Some make their abodes in cloud-top
castles so high that flying dragons appear as specks
below. Others live atop mountain peaks that piereelthe
clouds. Some occupy palaces covered with algae and
coral at the bottom of the ocean, or grim fortresses in
undersea rifts.
Detached Oracles. Storm giants recall the glory of
ancient giant empires forged by the god Annam. They
seek to restore what was lost when those empires fell.
They don't compete for status in the ordning but live
out the centuries of their existence in contemplative
seclusion, watching the starry heavens and the ocean's
depths for signs, symbols, and omens of Annam's favor.
Storm giants see the events of the world in a wide
perspective. They can foretell the rise and fall of kings
and empires, see the beginnings and ends of fortune
and disaster, and find the patterns within seemingly
unrelated events. By reading omens and prophesying,
storm giants learn of vast secrets previously unknown
and troves of lore utterly forgotten.
Kings will rise and fall, wars will be won and lost,
and good and evil will wrestle in conflict. Storm giants
have watched these events in the manner of mortal
gods over many lifetimes, and they know it is pointless
to intervene. Even so, a storm giant might willingly
disclose certain secrets to benevolent beings that visit
its remote domain with specific purpose. Such creatures
must speak and act respectfully, however, for a storm
giant roused to anger is a force of utter destruction.
Solitary Lives. Storm giants communicate
infrequently with others of their kind. They do so
usually to compare signs and omens or engage in a rare
courtship. Storm giant parents stay together to raise a
child to maturity, then return to the solitary isolation
they cherish.
Some humanoid cultures worship storm giants as
they would worship lesser gods, creating myths and
stories around the giants' exploits and vast knowledge.
A storm giant is governed by the dictates of its
conscience, however, and not by any culture's laws or
codes of honor. As such, a storm giant that bends its
mind toward greed or gains a taste for petty power can
easily become a terrible threat.
tUtii
*
Hit,i, Giant
16' TALL
f^?E Giant     -Stone Giant     Frost Giant
ftfil$'TM.U                  £ ltf,JttM-                        2)' TALL.
Cloud Giant
24' tall
Storm CjJ^nj
26'' TAtL
153
Cloud Giant
Huge giant, neutral good (50%) or neutral evil (50%)
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 200 (16dl2 +96)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
27 (+8)      10 (+0)     22 (+6)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)     16 (+3)     16 (+3)
% Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +7
J Skills Insight +7, Perception +7
Senses passive Perception 17
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Keen Smell. The giant has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Innate Spellcasting. The giant's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma. It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no
material components:
At will: detect magic, fog cloud, light
3/day each: feather fall, fly, misty step, telekinesis
1/day each: control weather, gaseous form
Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two morningstar attacks.
Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) piercing damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 30 (4dl0 + 8) bludgeoning damage.

Fire Giant
Huge giant, lawful evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 162 (13dl2+78)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
25 (+7)
DEX
9(-l)
CON
23 (+6)
INT          WIS
10 (+0)     14 (+2)
CHA
13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +10, Cha +5
Skills Athletics +11, Perception +6
Damage Immunities fire
Senses passive Perception 16
Languages Giant
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two greatsword attacks.
Creatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 28 (6d6 + 7) slashing damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 29 (4dl0 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
154
qytAHts
V
Frost Giant
Huge giant, neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (patchwork armor)
Hit Points 138 (12dl2 + 60)
Speed 40 ft.
Hill Giant
Huge giant, chaotic evil
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)       9 (-1)       21 (+5)       9 (-1)      10 (+0)      12 (+1)
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 105 (10dl2 +40)
Speed 40 ft.
Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +3, Cha +4
Skills Athletics +9, Perception +3
Damage Immunities cold
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Giant
Challenge8 (3,900 XP)
Actions
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)       8(-l)       19 (+4)       5 (-3)       9 (-1)        6 (-2)
Skills Perception +2
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Giant
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Actions
I Multiattack. The giant makes two greataxe attacks.
I Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
J target. Hit: 25 (3dl2 + 6) slashing damage.
I Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
I target. Hit: 28 (4dl0 + 6) bludgeoning damage.

••-^-'^^; ■- * •
1l-^«v^„
W^^UBU'imi,Hri-^
I Multiattack. The giant makes two greatclub attacks.
Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 21 (3dl0+5) bludgeoning damage.
.
155
StonI'Giant
Huge giant, neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 126 (lldl2 +55)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
23 (+6)
DEX
15 (+2)
CON
20 (+5)
INT
10 (+0)
WIS
12 (+1)
CHA
9(-l)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +8, Wis +4
Skills Athletics +12, Perception +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Giant
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Stone Camouflage. The giant has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.
Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two greatclub attacks.
Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 28 (4dl0 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 17 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Reactions____________________________
Rock Catching. If a rock or similar object is hurled at the giant,
the giant can, with a successful DC 10 Dexterity saving throw,
catch the missile and take no bludgeoning damage from it.
Storm Giant
Huge giant-chaotic good
Armor Class 16 (scale mail)
Hit Points 230 (20dl2+100)
Speed 50 ft., swim 50 ft.
■;• STR
29 (+9)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      20 (+5)
INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)     18 (+4)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Str +14, Con +10, Wis +9, Cha +9
Skills Arcana +8, Athletics +14, History +8, Perception +9
Damage Resistances cold
Damage Immunities lightning, thunder
Senses passive Perception 19
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Amphibious. The giant can breathe air and water.
innate Spellcasting. The giant's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 17). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring no material components:
At will: detect magic, feather fall, levitate, light
3/day each: control weather, water breathing

Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two greatsword attacks.
Creatzword. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 30 (6d6 + 9) slashing damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 35 (4dl2 + 9) bludgeoning damage.
Lightning Strike (Recharge 5-6). The giant hurls a magical
lightning bolt at a point it can see within 500 feet of it. Each
creature within 10 feet of that point must make a DC 17
Dexterity saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) lightning damage on a
j failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
T56
WANTS
-
r
Gibbering Mouther
Of all the terrors created by foul sorcery, gibbering
mouthers are among the most wicked and depraved.
This creature is the composite eyes, mouths, and
liquefied matter of its former victims. Driven to insanity
by the destruction of their bodies and absorption into
the mouther, those victims gibber incoherent madness,
forced to consume everything in reach.
Amoeboid Form. The gibbering mouther's body is
an amorphous mass of mouths and eyes that propels
itself by oozing forward, fastening several mouths
to the ground and pulling its bulk behind. Though
it moves slowly, it swims through water, mud, and
quicksand with ease.
Mouths of Madness. When a gibbering mouther
senses prey, its mouths begin to murmur and chatter,
each with a different voice: deep or shrill, wailing
or ululating, crying out in agony or ecstasy. This
cacophonous gibbering overcomes the senses of any
creature that hears it, causing most to flee in terror.
Others are overcome with madness or stand paralyzed,
fixated on the horrific creature as it oozes forward to
consume them.
All-Consuming. Driven to devour any creature it can
reach, a gibbering mouther flows over victims transfixed
by its mad ranting, its multitudinous voices temporarily
silenced as it gnaws and swallows living flesh. The
monster liquefies stone with which it comes into contact,
hindering creatures that overcome its gibbering and
attempt to flee.
A gibbering mouther leaves nothing of its prey
behind. However, even as the last of a victim's body is
consumed, its eyes and mouth boil to the surface, ready
to join the chorus of tormented gibbering that welcomes
the monster's next meal.
Gibbering Mouther
Medium aberratioh, neutral
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27)
Speed 10 ft., swim 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)       8 (-1)       16 (+3)       3 (-4)      10 (+0)      6 (-2)
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Aberrant Ground. The ground in a 10-foot radius around the
mouther is doughlike difficult terrain. Each creature that starts
its turn in that area must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving
throw or have its speed reduced to 0 until the start of its
next turn.
Gibbering. The mouther babbles incoherently while it can
see any creature and isn't incapacitated. Each creature that
starts its turn within 20 feet of the mouther and can hear the
gibbering must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw.
On a failure, Hie creature can't take reactions until-the start of
its next turn and rolls a d8 to determine what it does during
its turn. On a 1 to 4, the creature does.nothing. On a 5 or 6,
the creature takes no action or bonu$ action and uses all its
movement to move in a randomly determined direction. On a
7 or 8, the creature makes a melee attack against a randomly
determined creature within its reach or does nothing if it can't
make such an attack.
Actions
Multiattack. The gibbering mouther makes one bite attack
and, if it can, uses its Blinding Spittle.
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 17 (5d6) piercing damage. If the target is Medium or
smaller, it must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone. If the target is killed by this damage, it is
absorbed into the mouther.
Blinding Spittle (Recharge 5-6). The mouther spits a chemical
glob at a point it can see within 15 feet of it. The glob explodes
in a blinding flash of light on impact. Each creature within 5
feet of the flash must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving
throw or be blinded until the end of the mouther's next turn.
m
r   .   "i -■   .i-.i-^'Tiiraji

GIBBfilltJji
157
*
GltH
The warlike githyanki and the contemplative githzerai
are a sundered people—two cultures that utterly despise
one another. Before there were githyanki or githzerai,
these creatures were a single race enslaved by the mind
flayers. Although they attempted to overthrow their
masters many times, their rebellions were repeatedly
crushed until a great leader named Gith arose.
After much bloodshed, Gith and her followers threw
off the yoke of their illithid masters, but another leader
named Zerthimon emerged in the aftermath of battle.
Zerthimon challenged Gith's motives, claiming that
her strict martial leadership and desire for vengeance
amounted to little more than another form of slavery
for her people. A rift erupted between followers of each
leader, and they eventually became the two races whose
enmity endures to this day.
Whether these tall, gaunt creatures were peaceful or
savage, cultured or primitive before the mind flayers
enslaved and changed them, none can say. Not even
the original name of their race remains from that
distant time.
Githyanki________________________
The githyanki plunder countless worlds from the decks
of their astral vessels and the backs of red dragons.
Feathers, beads, gems, and precious metals decorate
their armor and weapons—the legendary silver swords
with which they cut through their foes. Since winning
their freedom from the mind flayers, the githyanki have
become ruthless conquerors under the rulership of their
dread lich-queen, Vlaakith.
Astral Raiders. The githyanki despise all other races,
undertaking devastating raids that take them from their
strongholds in the Astral Plane to the farflung corners
of the multiverse. War is the ultimate expression of
githyanki culture, and their pitiless black eyes know
no mercy. After a raid, they leave shattered survivors
enough food and resources to weakly endure. Later, the
githyanki return to their conquered foes, plundering
them again and again.
Followers of Gith. In their own language, githyanki
means "followers of Gith." Under the guidance of Gith,
the githyanki stratified into a militaristic society, with
a strict caste system, dedicated to the ongoing fight
against the victims and sworn enemies of their race.
When their leader Gith perished, she was replaced by
her undead adviser, Vlaakith. The lich-queen forbade
worship of all beings except herself.
Of all their enemies, the githyanki most hate their
former masters, the mind flayers. Their close kin,
the githzerai, are second in their enmity. All other
creatures are treated with simple contempt by the
githyanki, whose xenophobic pride defines their view of
inferior races.
Silver Swords. In ancient times, gith knights created
special weapons to combat their mind flayer masters.
These silver swords channel the force of the wielder's
will, dealing psychic as well as physical damage. A
githyanki can't become a knight until it masters the
singular discipline needed to will such a blade into

existence. A silver sword is equivalent to a greatsword,
and takes on the properties of a +3 greatsword in the
hands of its creator.
In the eyes of the githyanki, each silver sword is a
priceless relic and a work of art. Githyanki knights
will hunt down and destroy any non-githyanki that
dares to carry or wield a silver sword, reclaiming it for
their people.
Red Dragon Riders. In the uprising against the
-illithids, Gith sought allies. Her adviser Vlaakith
appealed to Tiamat, the goddess of evil dragonkind, and
Gith ventured into the Nine Hells to meet with her. Only
Tiamat now knows what passed between them, but Gith
returned to the Astral Plane with the Dragon Queen's
red dragon consort Ephelomon, who proclaimed that his
kind would forever act as allies to the githyanki. Not all
red dragons honor the alliance kindled so long ago, but
most at least don't consider the githyanki their enemies.
Outposts in the Mortal Realm. Since creatures
that dwell on the Astral Plane don't age, the githyanki
establish creches in remote areas of the Material Plane
to raise their young. Doubling as military academies,
these creches train young githyanki to harness their
psychic and combat abilities. When a githyanki grows
to adulthood and slays a mind flayer as part of a sacred
rite of passage, it is permitted to rejoin its people on the
Astral Plane.
Githzerai________________________
Focused philosophers and austere ascetics, the
githzerai pursue lives of rigid order. Lean and muscular,
they wear unadorned clothing free of ornamentation,
keeping their own counsel and trusting few creatures
outside of their own kind. Having turned their backs
on their warlike githyanki kin, the githzerai maintain a
strict monastic lifestyle, dwelling on islands of order in
the vast sea of chaos that is the plane of Limbo.
Psionic Adepts. The progenitors of the githzerai
adapted to—and were transformed by—the psychic
environment imposed on them by their illithid
overlords. Under the teachings of Zerthimon, who
called on his people to abandon the warlike ambitions
of Gith, the githzerai focused their mental energy
on creating physical and psychic barriers to protect
them from attack, psychic or otherwise. Fighting is
personal to a githzerai, which uses its mind to daze
and incapacitate opponents, leaving them vulnerable to
physical punishment.
Order amid Chaos. The githzerai willingly dwell in
the heart of utter chaos in Limbo—a twisting, mercurial
plane prone to manipulation and subjugation by
githzerai minds strong enough to master it. Limbo is
a maelstrom of primal matter and energy, its terrain a
storm of rock and earth swept up in torrents of murky
liquid, buffeted by strong winds, blasted by fire, and
chilled by crushing walls of ice.
The forces of Limbo react to sentience, however.
Using the power of their minds, the githzerai tame the
plane's chaotic elements, causing them to settle into
fixed and survivable forms and creating oases and
sanctuaries within the maelstrom.
Githzerai fortress-monasteries stand resolute against*•
the chaos that surrounds them, virtually impervious
to the turmoil of their surroundings, because the
githzerai will it. Each monastery is overseen by monks
that impose a strict schedule of chants, meals, martial
arts training, and devotions according to their own
philosophy. Behind their psionically fortified walls, the
githzerai embrace thought, learning, psionic power,
order, and discipline above all other things.
The social hierarchy of the githzerai is based on merit,
and those githzerai who are the wisest teachers and
the most skilled at physical and mental combat become
leaders. The githzerai revere great heroes and teachers
of the past, emulating those figures' virtues in their
everyday lives.
Disciples of Zerthimon. Githzerai revere Zerthimon,
the founder of their race. Although Gith won their
people's freedom, Zerthimon saw her as unfit to lead.
He believed that her warmongering would soon make
her a tyrant no better than the mind flayers.
Skilled githzerai monks that best exemplify the
teachings and principles of Zerthimon are called zerths.
These powerful and disciplined monks can shift their
bodies from one plane to another using only the power
of their minds.
Beyond Limbo. Though githzerai rarely deal with
the realms beyond Limbo, advanced monks of other
races sometimes seek out a githzerai monastery and
attempt to gain admittance as students. More rarely, a
githzerai master establishes a hidden monastery on the
Material Plane to train young githzerai or to spread the
philosophy and teachings of Zerthimon.
As disciplined as they are, the githzerai have never
forgotten their long imprisonment by the mind flayers.
As a special devotion, they organize a rrakkma—an
illithid hunting party—to other planes, not returning
to their monasteries until they slay at least as many
illithids as there are hunters in the party.
FLAVERS THAT THE                             th£1R
ONERACE.OM.TEO.HAV^                stEAcH
_^i   THEV WAGE WAK
FRE              La HATRED NONE CAN FULLY
OTHER WITH A HATRt
COMPREHEND."          Ar,stulTheYELLO«,

■r
■^ 159
Githyanki Warrior
Medium humanoid (gith), lawful evil
------                      -i
Armor Class 17 (half plate)
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)       13 (+1)      13 (+1)      10 (+0)
Saving Throws Con +3, Int +3, Wis +3
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages Gith
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The githyanki's innate
spellcasting ability is Intelligence. It can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no components:
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible)
3/day each: jump, misty step, nondetection (self only)
Actions
Multiattack. The githyanki makes two greatsword attacks.
Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6)
psychic damage.
'-■   ■-  ±   ■-"-■- J" --           -.--..   —
Githyanki Knight
Medium humanoid (gith), lawful evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 91 (14d8 + 28)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      14 (+2)      15 (+2)      14 (+2)     14 (+2)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Con +5, Int +5, Wis +5
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Gith
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The githyanki's innate
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit
with spell attacks). It can innately cast the following spells,
requiring no components:
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible)
3/day each: jump, misty step, nondetection (self only), tongues
1/day each: plane shift, telekinesis
Actions
Multiattack. The githyanki makes two silver greatsword attacks.
Silver Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage plus
10 (3d6) psychic damage. This is a magic weapon attack.
On a critical hit against a target in an astral body (as with
the astral projection spell), the githyanki can cut the silvery
cord that tethers the target to its material body, instead of
dealing damage.
Githzerai Monk
Medium humaiibid (gith), lawful neutral
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 38 (7d8 + 7)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       15 (+2)      12 (+1)       13 (+1)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)
Saving Throws Str +3, Dex +4, Int +3, Wis +4
Skills Insight+4, Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Gith
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The githzerai's innate
1 spellcasting ability is Wisdom. It can innately cast the following I
spells, requiring no components:
I At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible)
3/day each: feather fall, jump, see invisibility, shield
J Psychic Defense. While the githzerai is wearing no armor and
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier.
, Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The githzerai makes two unarmed strikes.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 9 (2d8)
I psychic damage. This is a magic weapon attack.
-. )»U '  a-^WBAtfcU^ "JU«—1
Githzerai Zerth
Medium humanoid (gith), lawful ne'utral
Armor Class 17
Hit Points 84 (13d8 + 26)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      18 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)     17 (+3)      12 (+1)
Saving Throws Str +4, Dex +7, Int +6, Wis +6
) Skills Arcana+6, Insight+6, Perception +6
Senses passive Perception 16
( Languages Gith
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The githzerai's spellcasting
ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell
attacks). It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no
components:
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible)
3/day each: feather fall, jump, see invisibility, shield
1/day each: phantasmal killer, plane shift
Psychic Defense. While the githzerai is wearing no armor and
' wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier.
I Actions________________
Multiattack. The githzerai makes two unarmed strikes.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
1 one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 13 (3d8)
I psychic damage. This is a magic weapon attack.
I                                                                        -                             -i
i6t
■=^=^SSS=
u

\
G^fbtL§
Gnolls are feral humanoids that attack settlements
along the frontiers and borderlands of civilization
without warning, slaughtering their victims and
devouring their flesh.
Demonic Origin. The origin of the gnolls traces back
to a time when the demon lord Yeenoghu found his way
to the Material Plane and ran amok. Packs of ordinary
hyenas followed in his wake, scavenging the demon
lord's kills. Those hyenas were transformed into the first
gnolls, parading after Yeenoghu until he was banished
back to the Abyss. The gnolls then scattered across the
face of the world, a dire reminder of demonic power.
Nomadic Destroyers. Gnolls are dangerous
because they strike at random. They emerge from
the wilderness, plunder and slaughter, then move
elsewhere. They attack like a plague of locusts,
pillaging settlements and leaving little behind but razed
buildings, gnawed corpses, and befouled land. Gnolls
choose easy targets for their raids. Armored warriors
holed up in a fortified castle will survive a rampaging
gnoll horde unscathed, even as the towns, villages, and
farms that surround the castle are ablaze, their people
slaughtered and devoured.
Gnolls rarely build permanent structures or
craft anything of lasting value. They don't make
weapons or armor, but scavenge such items from the
corpses of their fallen victims, stringing ears, teeth,
scalps, and other trophies from their foes onto their
patchwork armor.
Thirst for Blood. No goodness or compassion
resides in the heart of a gnoll. Like a demon, it lacks
anything resembling a conscience, and can't be taught
or coerced to put aside its destructive tendencies. The
gnolls' frenzied bloodlust makes them an enemy to all,
and when they lack a common foe, they fight among
themselves. Even the most savage ores avoid allying
with gnolls.
Gnoll Pack Lord________________
The alpha of a gnoll pack is the pack lord, ruling by
might and cunning. A pack lord earns the best of a gnoll
' pack's spoils, food, valuable trinkets, and magic items. It
ornaments its body with brutal piercings and grotesque
trophies, dyeing its fur with demonic sigils, hoping
Yeenoghu will make it invulnerable.
Gnoll Fang of Yeenoghu________
Gnolls celebrate their victories by performing demonic
rituals and making blood offerings to Yeenoghu.
Sometimes the demon lord rewards his worshipers
by allowing one of them to be possessed by a demonic
spirit. Marked as Yeenoghu's favorite, the lucky recipient
becomes a fang of Yeenoghu, the chosen of the Gnoll
Lord. In much the same way Yeenoghu created the
first gnolls, a hyena that feasts on a fang's slain foe
undergoes a horrible transformation, becoming a full-
grown adult gnoll. Depending on the number of hyenas
in a region, a fang of Yeenoghu can lead to a startling
increase in the gnoll population. Finding and killing the
fang is the only way to keep that population in check.
=
Gnoll
Medium humanoid (gnoll), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (hide armor, shield)
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
14 (+2)       12 (+1)      11 (+0)
INT          WIS
6 (-2)      10 (+0)
CHA
7 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Gnoll
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Rampage. When the gnoll reduces a creature to 0 hit points
with a melee attack on its turn, the gnoll can take a bonus
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage, or
6 (IdS + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage.
c=
'■  '.....—i
Gnoll Pack Lord
Medium humanoid (gnoll), chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (chain shirt)
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           OEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      14 (+2)      13 (+1)       8 (-1)      11 (+0)      9 (-1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Gnoll
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Rampage. When the gnoll reduces a creature to 0 hit points
I with a melee attack on its turn, the gnoll can take a bonus
I action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack.
Actions            ________________
i.............................                               i                                                                                                        ..........■■■.....i.i I.
I Multiattack. The gnoll makes two attacks, either with its glaive  I
\ or its longbow, and uses its Incite Rampage if it can.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage.
< Glaive. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.   I
Hit: 8 (ldlO + 3) slashing damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
Incite Rampage (Recharge 5-6). One creature the gnoll can see  '
J within 30 feet of it can use its reaction to make a melee attack
J if it can hearthe gnoll and has the Rampage trait.
f'-      ■   '  ' l       ■   ■-'---  -          ■-    '•■>-'- --i *--•"'- ■■*- --fa-  '"-'"
Gnoll Fang of Yeenoghu
Medium fiend (gnoll), chaotic evil
Armor Class 14 (hide armor)
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      15 (+2)      15 (+2)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)      13 (+1)
Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Abyssal, Gnoll
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Rampage. When the gnoll reduces a creature to 0 hit points
with a melee attack on its turn, the gnoll can take a bonus
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack.
Actions
Multiattack. The gnoll makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must
I succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or take 7 (2d6)
poison damage.
J Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
j Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage.


i63
Gnome, Deep (Svirfneblin)
Deep gnomes, or svirfneblin, live far below the world's
surface in twisting warrens and sculpted caverns.
They survive by virtue of their stealth, cleverness, and
tenacity. Their gray skin allows them to blend in with
surrounding stonework. They are also surprisingly
heavy and strong for their size. An average adult weighs
100 to 120 pounds and stands 3 feet tall.
A typical svirfneblin enclave contains several hundred
deep gnomes and is strongly fortified. Secret tunnels
lead to and from the settlement, and the deep gnomes
use these as evacuation routes when the enclave comes
under attack.
Established Gender Roles. Male svirfneblin
are bald, while females have stringy gray hair.
Traditionally, females run the enclaves while males
scour the outskirts in search of enemies and deposits of
precious gemstones.
Gemstone Harvesters. Svirfneblin cherish fine
gemstones, especially rubies, which they harvest from
mines deep in the Underdark. The hunt for gems often
brings them into conflict with beholders, drow, kuo-toa,
duergar, and mind flayers. Of all their natural enemies,
deep gnomes fear and despise the murderous, demon-
worshiping drow the most.
Earth Friends. Deep gnomes are often encountered
!ln the company of creatures from the Elemental Plane
^of Earth. Some svirfneblin can summon such creatures.
Earth creatures guard svirfneblin settlements,
especially xorn enticed to service with the promise of
gems to feed on.
''
......       ;■■---                                            ~
Deep Gnome (Svirfneblin)
Small humanoid, (gnome), neutral good
tfauiniim^in;^,   ;           4     i '.■  n,---------^-----------
v^rfhor Class 15 (chain shirt)
Hit Points 16 (3d6 + 6)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)     10 (+0)      9 (-1)
Skills Investigation +3, Perception +2, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Gnomish, Terran, Undercommon
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Stone Camouflage. The gnome has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.
Gnome Cunning. The gnome has advantage on Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws against magic.
Innate Spellcasting. The gnome's innate spellcasting ability is
Intelligence (spell save DC 11). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring no material components:
At will: nondetection (self only)
1/day each: blindness/deafness, blur, disguise self
Actions
War Pick. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
Poisoned Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one creature. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or
be poisoned for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
*H
GISOME, DEEP
^±.a
SM&FNEBLrN)
r
Goblins
Goblins are small, black-hearted, selfish humanoids that
lair in caves, abandoned mines, despoiled dungeons,
and other dismal settings. Individually weak, goblins
gather in large—sometimes overwhelming—numbers.
They crave power and regularly abuse whatever
authority they obtain.
Goblinoids. Goblins belong to a family of creatures
called goblinoids. Their larger cousins, hobgoblins and
bugbears, like to bully goblins into submission. Goblins
are lazy and undisciplined, making them poor servants,
laborers, and guards.
Malicious Glee. Motivated by greed and malice,
goblins can't help but celebrate the few times they have
the upper hand. They dance, caper with sheer joy when
victory is theirs. Once their revels have ended, goblins
delight in the torment of other creatures and embrace
all manner of wickedness.
Leaders and Followers. Goblins are ruled by the
strongest or smartest among them. A goblin boss might
command a single lair, while a goblin king or queen
(who is nothing more than a glorified goblin boss)
rules hundreds of goblins, spread out among multiple
lairs to ensure the tribe's survival. Goblin bosses are
easily ousted, and many goblin tribes are taken over by
hobgoblin warlords or bugbear chiefs.
Challenging Lairs. Goblins festoon their lairs with
alarms designed to signal the arrival of intruders. Those
lairs are also riddled with narrow tunnels and bolt-holes
that human-sized creatures can't navigate, but which
goblins can crawl through with ease, allowing them to
flee or to circle around and surprise their enemies.
Rat Keepers and Wolf Riders. Goblins have an
affinity for rats and wolves, raising them to serve as
companions and mounts, respectively. Like rats, goblins
shun sunlight and sleep underground during the day.
Like wolves, they are pack hunters, made bolder by their
numbers. When they hunt from the backs of wolves,
goblins use hit-and-run attacks.
Worshipers ofMaglubiyet. Maglubiyet the Mighty
One, the Lord of Depths and Darkness, is the greater
god of goblinoids. Envisioned by most goblins as an
eleven-foot-tall battle-scarred goblin with black skin and
fire erupting from his eyes, he is worshiped not out of
adoration but fear. Goblins believe that when they die in
battle, their spirits join the ranks of Maglubiyet's army
on the plane of Acheron. This is a "privilege" that most
goblins dread, fearing the Mighty One's eternal tyranny
even more than death.
}
1


'|l
"Bree-Yark/"
(OR SO THEY SAVj
I
Goblin Boss
Small humanoid (goblinoid), neutrdl evil
Armor Class 17 (chain shirt, shield)
Hit Points 21 (6d6)
Speed 30 ft.
Goblin
Small humanoid (goblinoid), neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (leather armor, shield)
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
8(-l)       14 (+2)     10 (+0)      10 (+0)      8(-l)       8(-l)
Skills Stealth +6
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Nimble Escape. The goblin can take the Disengage or Hide
action as a bonus action on each of its turns.
Actions
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) slashing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) piercing damage.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      14 (+2)     10 (+0)      10 (+0)      8(-l)      10 (+0)
Skills Stealth +6
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Nimble Escape. The goblin can take the Disengage or Hide
action as a bonus action on each of its turns.
Actions
Multiattack. The goblin makes two attacks with its scimitar.
The second attack has disadvantage.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) slashing damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Reactions____________________________
Redirect Attack. When a creature the goblin can see targets
it with an attack, the goblin chooses another goblin within 5
feet of it. The two goblins swap places, and the chosen goblin
I becomes the target instead.

166       v
gSOBI*jNS
V
J

Golems
Golems are made from humble materials—clay, flesh
and bones, iron, or stone—but they possess astonishing
power and durability. A golem has no ambitions,
needs no sustenance, feels no pain, and knows no
remorse. An unstoppable juggernaut, it exists to follow
its creator's orders, and it protects or attacks as that
creator demands.
To create a golem, one requires a manual of golems
(see the Dungeon Master's Guide). The comprehensive
illustrations and instructions in a manual detail the
process for creating a golem of a particular type.
Elemental Spirit in Material Form. The construction
of a golem begins with the building of its body, requiring
great command of the craft of sculpting, stonecutting,
ironworking, or surgery. Sometimes a golem's creator
is the master of the art, but often the individual
who desires a golem must enlist master artisans to
do the work.
After constructing the body from clay, flesh, iron, or
stone, the golem's creator infuses it with a spirit from
the Elemental Plane of Earth. This tiny spark of life
has no memory, personality, or history. It is simply the
impetus to move and obey. This process binds the spirit
to the artificial body and subjects it to the will of the
golem's creator.
Ageless Guardians. Golems can guard sacred sites,
tombs, and treasure vaults long after the deaths of
their creators, carrying out their appointed tasks for
all eternity while brushing off physical damage and
ignoring all but the most potent spells.
A golems can be created with a special amulet or
other item that allows the possessor of the item to
control the golem. Golems whose creators are long dead
can thus be harnessed to serve a new master.
Blind Obedience. When its creator or possessor is
on hand to command it, a golem performs flawlessly. If
the golem is left without instructions or is incapacitated,
it continues to follow its last orders to the best of its
ability. When it can't fulfill its orders, a golem might
react violently—or stand and do nothing. A golem that
has been given conflicting orders sometimes alternates
between them.
A golem can't think or act for itself. Though it
understands its commands perfectly, it has no grasp
of language beyond that understanding, and can't be
reasoned with or tricked with words.
Constructed Nature. A golem doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
,MABLE DOORS LAY A GRAND
•Bevono the ^"^^ stone throne,
HALL END.NG BEFORE ^T                    .^^ ftN(J
UPON WH.CH SAT AN IRON *«    ^ ^ cU)TCHE0
wl0ER THAN TWO "^              A FATHER WHIP.
AN WON SWORD. IN T«                       eN.
*6 SHOULD HAVE TURNE.> B              ^ ARCHMA6E.
_MORl»ENKA>N                           owlN6
eWWH,CU,H.H.    ^GEONSB6LOW
EXPLOITS IN                 Waur6 CftSTue
Clay Golem
****
Sculpted from clay, this bulky golem stands head and,
shoulders taller than most human-sized creatures. It is
human shaped, but its proportions are off.
Clay golems are often divinely endowed with purpose
by priests of great faith. However, clay is a Wedk vessel
for life force. If the golem is damaged, the elemental
spirit bound into it can break free. Such a golem / (
runs amok, smashing everything around it until ifis
destroyed or completely repaired.
Flesh Golem                         .     ,-*• t*   ,'c*i
iff v--y*
A flesh golem is a grisly assortment of hunianoi^g^^y^' '
parts stitched and bolted together into a muscled Brute
imbued with formidable strength. Its brain is capable-
of simple reason, though its thoughts are no more
sophisticated than those of a young child. The golem's
muscle tissue responds to the power of lightning,
invigorating the creature with vitality and strength.
Powerful enchantments protect the golem's skin,
deflecting spells and all but the most potent weapons.
A flesh golem lurches with a stiff-jointed gait, as if not
in complete control of its body. Its dead flesh isn't an
ideal container for an elemental spirit, which sometimes
howls incoherently to vent its outrage. If the spirit
breaks free of its creator's will, the golem goes berserk
until calmed, or until its shell of flesh is destroyed or
completely healed.
Iron Golem
The mightiest of the golems, the iron golem is a
massive, towering giant wrought of heavy metal. An
iron golem's shape can be worked into any form, though
most are fashioned to look like giant suits of armor. Its
fist can destroy creatures with a single blow, and its
clanging steps shake the earth beneath its feet. Iron
golems wield enormous blades to extend their reach,
and all can belch clouds of deadly poison.
An iron golem's body is smelted with rare tinctures
and admixtures. Though other golems bear weaknesses
inherent in their materials or the power of the elemental
spirit bound within them, iron golems were designed
to be nearly invulnerable. Their iron bodies imprison
the spirits that drive them, and are susceptible only
to weapons imbued with magic or the strength
of adamantine.
Stone Golem
Stone golems display great variety in shape and form,
cut and chiseled from stone to appear as tall, impressive
statues. Though most bear humanoid features, stone
golems can be carved in any form the sculptor can
imagine. Ancient stone golems found in sealed tombs
or flanking the gates of lost cities sometimes take the
forms of giant beasts.
Like other golems, stone golems are nearly
impervious to spells and ordinary weapons. Creatures
that fight a stone golem can feel the ebb and flow of time.
slow down around them, almost as though they wefe^
made of stone themselves.
167
.«——"-t::":.-»"'".
MANUAL OF CLAT
Clay Golem
Large construct, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 133 (14dl0 + 56)
Speed 20 ft.
STR
20 (+5)
DEX
9(-l)
CON
18 (+4)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
8(-l)
CHA
l(-5)
^^
Damage Immunities acid, poison, psychic; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't
adamantine
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Acid Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to acid
damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a number of
hit points equal to the acid damage dealt.
Berserk. Whenever the golem starts its turn with 60 hit points
or fewer, roll a d6. On a 6, the golem goes berserk. On each of
its turns while berserk, the golem attacks the nearest creature
it can see, If no creature is near enough to move to and attack,
the golem attacks an object with preference for an object
smaller than itself. Once the golem goes berserk, it continues
to do so until it is destroyed or regains all its hit points.
Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect
that would alter its form.
Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The golem's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The golem makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw
or have its hit point maximum reduced by an amount equal to
the damage taken. The target dies if this attack reduces its hit
point maximum to 0. The reduction lasts until removed by the
greater restoration spell or other magic.
Haste (Recharge 5-6). Until the end of its next turn, the
golem magically gains a +2 bonus to its AC, has advantage
on Dexterity saving throws, and can use its slam attack as a
bonus action.

168
PQLEMS
J
^

Flesh Golem
Medium construct, neutral
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 93 (lld8 + 44)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
19 (+4)
DEX
9(-l)
CON
18 (+4)
INT
6 (-2)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
5 (-3)
Damage Immunities lightning, poison; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't
adamantine
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Berserk. Whenever the golem starts its turn with 40 hit points
or fewer, roll a d6. On a 6, the golem goes berserk. On each of
its turns while berserk, the golem attacks the nearest creature
it can see. If no creature is near enough to move to and attack,
the golem attacks an object, with preference for an object
i smaller than itself. Once the golem goes berserk, it continues
to do so until it is destroyed or regains all its hit points.
The golem's creator, if within 60 feet of the berserk golem,
can try to calm it by speaking firmly and persuasively. The
golem must be able to hear its creator, who must take an
action to make a DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) check. If the
check succeeds, the golem ceases being berserk. If it takes
damage while still at 40 hit points or fewer, the golem might go
berserk again.
Aversion of Fire. If the golem takes fire damage, it has
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks until the end of
its next turn.
Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect
that would alter its form.
Lightning Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to
lightning damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a
number of hit points equal to the lightning damage dealt.
Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The golem's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The golem makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
l^-^^^fT
--------;__—
I69
Iron Golem
Large construct, unaligned
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 210 (20dl0+100)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
24 (+7)       9 (-1)       20 (+5)       3 (-4)      11 (+0)       1 (-5)
Damage Immunities fire, poison, psychic; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't
adamantine
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
M Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP)
Fire Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to fire
damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a number of
hit points equal to the fire damage dealt.
Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect
that would alter its form.
Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The golem's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The golem makes two melee attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (3d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 23 (3dl0 + 7) slashing damage.
Poison Breath (Recharge 6). The golem exhales poisonous gas
in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 19
Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) poison damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Stone XjOlem
largefon?tm^.ufalignect
Armor Class 17. (natural armor)
Hit Points 178 (17dl0 +85)
Speed 30 ft.
5 *STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)       9 (-1)       20 (+5)       3 (-4)      11 (+0)       1 (-5)
Damage Immunities poison, psychic; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't
adamantine
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect
that would alter its form.
Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The golem's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The golem makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Slow (Recharge 5-6). The golem targets one or more creatures
it can see within 10 feet of it. Each target must make a DC 17
Wisdom saving throw against this magic. On a failed save, a
target can't use reactions, its speed is halved, and it can't make
more than one attack on its turn. In addition, the target can
, take either an action or a bonus action on its turn, not both.
These effects last for 1 minute. A target can repeat the saving
! throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
. on a success.

I70
>F
GOLEMS
Gorgon
Large monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 114 (12dl0 + 48)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)      11 (+0)      18 (+4)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +4
Condition Immunities petrified
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge5 (1,800 XP)
Trampling Charge. If the gorgon moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack on the
same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 16 Strength
saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the
gorgon can make one attack with its hooves against it as a
bonus action.
Actions
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (2dl2+ 5) piercing damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2dl0+ 5) bludgeoning damage.
Petrifying Breath (Recharge 5-6). The gorgon exhales
petrifying gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, a target begins to turn to stone and is restrained.
The restrained target must repeat the saving throw at the end
of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends on the target.
On a failure, the target is petrified until freed by the greater
restoration spell or other magic.
Gorgon
Few creatures that encounter a gorgon live to tell about
it. Its body is covered in iron plates, and its nostrils fume
with green vapor.
Horrific Structure. A gorgon's iron plates range from
steely black to gleaming silver, but this natural armor
in no way hinders its movement or mobility. The oils of
its body lubricate the armor. A sick or inactive gorgon
gathers rust like fungus or mange. When a rusty gorgon
moves, its plates squeal as they rub together.
Monstrous Predator. When a gorgon spots potential
prey, it charges with a hideous clamor of metal on
metal. When the gorgon hits, it pulverizes the foe and
sends its sprawling, then tramples it to death with its
cruel hooves. Faced with multiple foes, the gorgon
exhales its deadly vapor to overcome the creatures
it touches by turning them to stone. When it grows
hungry, it smashes its petrified prey to rubble and uses
its strong teeth to grind the stone into a powder that
provides nourishment. The crisscrossing network of
trampled trails and splintered trees that surrounds a
gorgon lair is strewn with the uneaten fragments of its
shattered foes.
allowing them to detect the presence of creatures and
objects in their immediate vicinity. The creature's ability
to manipulate electricity to sense and move also allow it
to absorb lightning without harm.
Although solitary by nature, grells sometimes gather
in small groups called covens.
Floating Ambushers. A grell prefers to ambush
lone creatures or stragglers, hovering silently near the
ceiling of a passage or cavern until a suitable target
passes below, whereupon it descends quickly and wraps
its tentacles around its prey. It then floats away to its lair
with the paralyzed creature in its clutches.
Alien Devourers. Grell are alien predators that group
other creatures into three categories: edibles, inedibles,
and Great Eaters (those rare creatures that might prey
on a grell). Grells have no compunction about attacking
creatures they classify as edible, including humanoids.
They tend to avoid bigger creatures that they have little
hope of carrying away.
A grell will sometimes allow adventurers to wage
war on the other monstrous inhabitants of the dungeon
complex it calls home, staying out of the adventurers'
way as they dispose of larger threats while waiting for
the right time to strike.
fetf 7^!*lilg»l.....„■■
■JJ-^S^      :.     .   _ .  _',»^fa«L«
,ws^^«5na
Grell
Medium aberration, neutral evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 55 (10d8 +10)
Speed 10 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR
15 (+2)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
13 (+1)
INT
12 (+1)
WIS
11 (+0)
CHA
9(-T)
-Our intrepid rogue climbeO up the shaft
TO SECURE A ROPE. THERE WAS A GASP.^ANO THE
ROPE FELL. WE NEVER SAW HER AGAIN."
-AN AOVENTl/RER'S ACCOUNT OF A
GRELL ATTACK IN KHVBER, PUBLlSHEO
,n THE KQRRANBERG CHRONICLE
Grell
A grell resembles a bulbous floating brain with a wide,
sharp beak. Its ten long tentacles are made of hundreds
of ring-shaped muscles sheathed in tough fibrous
hide. Sharp barbs line the tip each tentacle and inject
paralytic venom. The grell can partially retract its barbs
into its tentacles to handle or manipulate objects it
doesn't want to pierce or tear.
Grells have no eyes and floats by means of a sort of
levitation. They have keen hearing, however, and their
skin is sensitive to vibrations and electrical fields,
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities lightning
Condition Immunities blinded, prone
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 14
Languages Grell
Challenge 3 (700 XP)

Actions
Multiattack. The grell makes two attacks: one with its tentacles
and one with its beak.
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
1 creature. Hit: 7 (IdlO + 2) piercing damage, and the target
must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be
poisoned for 1 minute. The poisoned target is paralyzed, and
it can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
I ending the effect on a success.
The target is also grappled (escape DC 15). If the target is
Medium or smaller, it is also restrained until this grapple ends.
While grappling the target, the grell has advantage on attack
rolls against it and can't use this attack against other targets.
When the grell moves, any Medium or smaller target it is
grappling moves with it.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage.

ill
aftELt
X
r
Grick
I Medium monstrosity, neutral
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 27 (6d8)
1 Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
■
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)       3 (-4)      14 (+2)       5 (-3)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Stone Camouflage. The grick has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.
Actions
Multiattack. The grick makes one attack with its tentacles. If
' that attack hits, the grick can make one beak attack against the
' same target.
1 Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
' target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage.
J Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
-•■■■■■-■
—n
ru^XV-_.,:.   i
ES^SS
I
Grick Alpha
Large monstrosity, neutral
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 75 (lOdlO + 20)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.

STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      16 (+3)      15 (+2)       4 (-3)      14 (+2)       9 (-1)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Stone Camouflage. The grick has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.
Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The grick makes two attacks: one with its tail and
one with its tentacles. If it hits with its tentacles, the grick can
make one beak attack against the same target.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Grick
The wormlike grick waits unseen, blending in with the
rock of the caves and caverns it haunts. Only when prey
comes near does it rear up, its four barbed tentacles
unfurling to reveal its hungry, snapping beak.
Passive Predators. Gricks rarely hunt. Instead, they
drag their rubbery bodies to places where creatures
regularly pass, lurking out of sight amid rocky rubble
and debris, squeezing into burrows, holes, or crevices,
climbing up to ledges, or coiling around stalactites
to drop on unwary prey. A grick consumes virtually
anything that moves except for other gricks. 1^ targets
the nearest prey, grabbing a fallen creature with its
tentacles and dragging it off to eat alone.
Roving Ambushers. Gricks remain in an area until
the food supply dwindles, often because sentient
creatures become aware of their presence and plot
alternate routes around their lairs. When prey is scarce
in the Underdark, gricks venture aboveground to hunt
in the wilderness, lurking in trees or on cliff-side ledges.
A grick pack is often led by a single well-fed, oversized
alpha around which the others congregate.
Spoils of Slaughter. Over time, grick lairs accumulate
the cast-off possessions of intelligent prey, and expert
guides know to look out for these telltale signs.
Underdark explorers sometimes seal off the routes
leading to and from a grick lair to starve them, then
claim the wealth of the foul creatures' victims.
SKlCK
173
Griffon
Large monstrosity;unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 59 (7dl0 + 21)
Speed 30 ft., fly 80 ft.
Skills Perception +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Keen Sight. The griffon has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
| Actions
Multiattack. The griffon makes two attacks: one with its beak
, and one with its claws.
; Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
j Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.
j
1 Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Griffon
Griffons are ferocious avian carnivores with the
[biuscular bodies of lions and the head, forelegs, and
|vings of eagles. When they attack, griffons are as swift
and deadly as eagles, even as they strike with a lion's
savage might and grace.
Horse Eaters. Griffons hunt in small prides, flying
high over plains and forests near their rocky cliff-side
aeries. Herd animals and horses are the prey they
crave above all others, though they also hunt and kill
hippogriffs. When it spots horses, a griffon screeches
to alert its pride mates, which descend quickly
toward their prey.
Those riding or herding horses dread the griffon's
piercing cry, preparing themselves for the bloody fight
that inevitably follows. A griffon ignores a horse's rider
when possible, and a rider that abandons its mount, or
a herder that releases one or two horses, can escape
unharmed while the griffon targets its chosen prey.
Riders who attempt to protect their horses attract the
full fury of an attacking griffon.
Sky Dwellers. Griffons lair in high rocky clifftop
aeries, building their nests from sticks, leaves, and the
bones of their prey. Once griffons establish a territory,
they remain in that area until the food supply has
been exhausted.
Aggressive and territorial, griffons engage in brutal
aerial combat to defend their aeries, tearing and
shredding the wings of flying intruders to send them
spiraling to the ground. Creatures that climb to a
griffon's lair are plucked from the cliffs and eaten, or are
knocked from the heights to go tumbling to their deaths.
Trained Mounts. A griffon raised from an egg can be
trained to serve as a mount. However, such training is
time consuming, expensive (mostly for the ample food
the creature requires), and dangerous. Expert trainers
well versed in the griffon's legendary ferocity are typically
the only ones able to raise these creatures safely.
Once trained, a griffon is a fierce and loyal steed. It
bonds with one master for life, fighting to the death to
protect that rider. A griffon mount retains its ravenous
appetite for horseflesh, and a wise master ensures that
a griffon remains satiated with other prey when passing
through civilized lands.

174.
®&V$>ft
Grimlogk
The degenerate subterranean grimlocks were once
human, but their worship of the mind flayers over
generations of prowling the Underdark transformed
them into blind, monstrous cannibals long ago.
Debased Cultists. The empire of the mind flayers
once spread across many worlds, enslaving countless
races. Among those were human cultures whose high
priests the mind flayers subverted using their insidious
powers of thought control. Those leaders gradually
turned the faiths of their followers toward the illithids,
which they worshiped as blasphemous deities.
Over time, the rituals of these enslaved humans
created fervent cannibal cults that regarded the brain
eating of the mind flayers as a holy sacrament. The
illithids commanded their worshipers to abduct other
sentient creatures to be sacrificed. After the victims'
brains had been consumed, the mind flayers gave the
lifeless bodies to the cultists.
Blind Hunters. When the rule of the mind flayers
crumbled, their cults faced constant warfare from their
enemies, the same creatures that had once been their
victims. The cults fled into the Underdark domains of
their illithid gods. Over generations in that lightless
realm, the cultists learned to rely on their other senses
for survival. In time, their eyes withered away and
eyelids sealed, leaving only covered eye sockets behind.
A grimlock's ears prick up at the faintest footfall or
whisper echoing down stone passageways. It can speak
in tones too low for most other humanoids to hear. The
odors of sweat, flesh, and blood awaken its hunger,
and it can track by such scents like a bloodhound. To
enhance their senses, grimlocks leave trails of blood,
piles of dung, or the viscera of slain prey in places far
from their lairs. When intruders pass through those
areas, they carry the foul scents with them, warning the
grimlocks of their approach.
For most creatures, blindness is an enormous
hindrance. For a grimlock with its other heightened
senses, sightlessness is a boon. A grimlock isn't fooled
by visual illusions or misperceptions. It is fearless as it
stalks prey.
Endless War. Grimlocks still venerate the mind
flayers, serving them whenever possible. Grimlocks also
recall the war in which they were driven underground.
To them, it has never ended, They continue to return
to the surface world to abduct captives for their
illithid masters.
GRitaiibCK
frMeillUm humarioid (grimlock), neutral evil
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX         CON
12 (+1)      12 (+1)
INT          WIS
9 (-1)       8 (-1)
CHA
6 (-2)
Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3, Stealth +3
Condition Immunities blinded
Senses blindsight 30 ft. or 10 ft. while deafened (blind beyond
this radius), passive Perception 13
Languages Undercommon
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Blind Senses. The grimlock can't use its blindsight while
deafened and unable to smell.
Keen Hearing and Smell. The grimlock has advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Stone Camouflage. The grimlock has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.
Actions
Spiked Bone Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5
piercing damage.

one target. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 2 (ld4)
ssz:
-•
^
fiK[*n.r><:K
175
Hags
Hags represent all that is evil and cruel. Though they
resemble-withered crones, there is nothing mortal about
these monstrous creatures, whose forms reflect only the
wickedness in their hearts.
Faces of Evil. Ancient beings with origins in the
Feywild, hags are cankers on the mortal world. Their
withered faces are framed by long, frayed hair, horrid
moles and warts dot their blotchy skin, and their long,
skinny fingers are tipped by claws that can slice open
flesh with a touch. Their simple clothes are always
tattered and filthy.
All hags possess magical powers, and some have an
affinity for spellcasting. They can alter their forms or
curse their foes, and their arrogance inspires them to
view their magic as a challenge to the magic of the gods,
whom they blaspheme at every opportunity.
<4__________________________________________k.
Hag Covens
When hags must work together, they form covens, in spite of
their selfish natures. A coven is made up of hags of any type,
all of whom are equals within the group. However, each of
the hags continues to desire more personal power.
A coven consists of three hags so that any arguments
between two hags can be settled by the third. If more than
three hags ever come together, as might happen if two
covens come into conflict, the result is usually chaos.
Shared Spellcasting. While all three members of a hag
, coven are within 30 feet of one another, they can each cast
the following spells from the wizard's spell list but must
share the spell slots among themselves:
1st level (4 slots): identify, ray of sickness
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, locate object
3rd level (3 slots): bestow curse, counterspell, lightning bolt
4th level (3 slots): phantasmal killer, polymorph
5th level (2 slots): contact other plane, scrying
6th level (1 slot): eyebite
For casting these spells, each hag is a 12th-level spellcaster
that uses Intelligence as her spellcasting ability. The spell
save DC is 12 + the hag's Intelligence modifier, and the spell
attack bonus is 4 + the hag's Intelligence modifier.
Hag Eye. A hag coven can craft a magic item called a
hag eye, which is made from a real eye coated in varnish
and often fitted to a pendant or other wearable item. The
hag eye is usually entrusted to a minion for safekeeping
and transport. A hag in the coven can take an action to see
what the hag eye sees if the hag eye is on the same plane of
existence. A hag eye has AC 10, 1 hit point, and darkvision
with a radius of 60 feet. If it is destroyed, each coven member
takes 3dl0 psychic damage and is blinded for 24 hours.
A hag coven can have only one hag eye at a time, and
creating a new one requires all three members of the coven
to perform a ritual. The ritual takes 1 hour, and the hags can't
perform it while blinded. During the ritual, if the hags take any
action other than performing the ritual, they must start over.
Hags name themselves in darkly whimsical ways,
claiming monikers such as Black Morwen, Peggy
Pigknuckle, Grandmother Titchwillow, Nanna Shug,
Rotten Ethel, or Auntie Wormtooth.
Monstrous Motherhood. Hags propagate by
snatching and devouring human infants. After stealing
a baby from its cradle or its mother's womb, the
hag consumes the poor child. A week later, the hag
gives birth to a daughter who looks human until her
thirteenth birthday, whereupon the child transforms into
the spitting image of her hag mother.
Hags sometimes raise the daughters they spawn,
creating covens. A hag might also return the child to its
grieving parents, only to watch from the shadows as the
child grows up to become a horror.
Dark Bargains. Arrogant to a fault, hags believe
themselves to be the most cunning of creatures, and
they treat all others as inferior. Even so, a hag is open
to dealing with mortals as long as those mortals show
the proper respect and deference. Over their long lives,
hags accumulate much knowledge of local lore, dark
creatures, and magic, which they are pleased to sell.
Hags enjoy watching mortals bring about their own
downfall, and a bargain with a hag is always dangerous.
The terms of such bargains typically involve demands
to compromise principles or give up something dear—
especially if the thing lost diminishes or negates the
knowledge gained through the bargain.
A Foul Nature. Hags love the macabre and festoon
their garb with dead things and accentuate their
appearance with bones, bits of flesh, and filth. They
nurture blemishes and pick at wounds to produce
weeping, suppurating flesh. Attractive creatures evoke
disgust in a hag, which might "help" such creatures by
disfiguring or transforming them.
This embrace of the disturbing and unpleasant
extends to all aspects of a hag's life. A hag might fly in
• a magical giant's skull, landing it on a tree shaped to
resemble an enormous headless body. Another might
travel with a menagerie of monsters and slaves kept
in cages, and disguised by illusions to lure unwary
creatures close. Hags sharpen their teeth on millstones
and spin cloth from the intestines of their victims,
reacting with glee to the horror their actions invoke.
Dark Sorority. Hags maintain contact with each
other and share knowledge. Through such contacts, it
is likely that any given hag knows of every other hag
in existence. Hags don't like each other, but they abide
by an ageless code of conduct. Hags announce their
presence before crossing into another hag's territory,
bring gifts when entering another hag's dwelling, and
break no oaths given to other hags—as long as the oath
isn't given with the fingers crossed.
r.76
HAGS,
Some humanoids make the mistake of thinking that
the hags' rules of conduct apply to all creatures. When
Confronted by such an individual, a hag might find it
amusing to string the fool along for a while before
teaching it a permanent lesson.
Dark Lairs. Hags dwell in dark and twisted
woods, bleak moors, storm-lashed seacoasts,
and gloomy swamps. In time, the landscape
around a hag's lair reflects the creature's
noxiousness, such that the land itself can
attack and kill trespassers. Trees twisted by
darkness attack passersby, while vines snake
through the undergrowth to snare and drag off
creatures one at a time. Foul stinking fogs turn
the air to poison, and conceal pools of quicksand and
sinkholes that consume unwary wanderers.
Green Hag
The wretched and hateful green hags dwell in dying
forests, lonely swamps, and misty moors, making
their homes in caves. Green hags love to manipulate
other creatures into doing their bidding, masking their
intentions behind layers of deception. They lure victims
to thetri by mimicking voices calling out for help, or
drive unwanted visitors away by imitating the cries of
fierce beasts.
Obsession with Tragedy. Green hags revel in
the failings and tragedies of other creatures. They
derive joy from bringing people low and seeing hope
turn into despair, not just for individuals but also for
whole nations.
Covens. A green hag that is part of a coven (see
the "Hag Covens" sidebar) has a challenge rating of
5 (1,800 XP).
Green Hag
Medium fey, neutral evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 82 (lld8+33)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)       13 (+1)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)
\ Skills Arcana +3, Deception +4, Perception +4, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Common, Draconic, Sylvan
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
| Amphibious. The hag can breathe air and water.
Innate Spellcasting. The hag's innate spellcasting ability
is Charisma (spell save DC 12). She can innately cast the
t following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: dancing lights, minor illusion, vicious mockery
■■wanj*~g"!»TBg-
Mimicry. The hag can mijnic animal sounds and hurnanoid
voices. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are
imitations with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check.
Actions_____________________^     _____
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Illusory Appearance. The hag covers herself and anything she is
wearing or carrying with a magical illusion that makes her look
like another creature of her general size and humanoid shape.
The illusion ends if the hag takes a bonus action to end it or
if she dies.
The changes wrought by this effect fail to hold up to physical
inspection. For example, the hag could appear to have smooth
skin, but someone touching her would feel her rough flesh.
Otherwise, a creature must take an action to visually inspect
the illusion and succeed on a DC 20 Intelligence (Investigation)
check to discern that the hag is disguised.
Invisible Passage. The hag magically turns invisible until she
attacks or casts a spell, or until her concentration ends (as
if concentrating on a spell). While invisible, she leaves no
physical evidence of her passage, so she can be tracked only by
magic. Any equipment she wears or carries is invisible with her.
^-■--—•*^~
• jtt-^marj
-      i77
Night Hag
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 112 (15d8 +45)
Speed 30 ft.

Sly and subversive, night hags want to see the virtuous
turn to villainy: love turned into obsession, kindness
turned to hate, devotion to disregard, and generosity
to selfishness. Night hags take perverse joy in
corrupting mortals.
Night hags were once creatures of the Feywild, but
their foulness saw them exiled to Hades long ago, where
they degenerated into fiends. The night hags have long
since spread across the Lower Planes.
Soulmongers. While a humanoid sleeps, a night hag
can straddle the person ethereally and intrude upon its
dreams. Any creature with truesight can see the hag's
spectral form straddling its prey. The ethereal hag fills
her victim's head with doubts and fears, in the hope of
tricking it into performing evil acts in the waking world.
The hag continues her nightly visitations until the victim
finally expires in its sleep. If the hag has driven her
victim to commit evil deeds, she traps its corrupted soul
in her sou/ bag (see the "Night Hag Items" sidebar) for
transport to Hades.
Covens. A night hag that is part of a coven (see
the "Hag Covens" sidebar) has a challenge rating of
7 (2,900 XP).
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)      16 (+3)     14 (+2)     16 (+3)
Skills Deception +7, Insight+6, Perception +6, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances cold, fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Condition Immunities charmed
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal, Primordial
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The hag's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell attacks). She
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
components:
At will: detect magic, magic missile
2/day each: plane shift (self only), ray of enfeeblement, sleep
Magic Resistance. The hag has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions_______________             • , '  - .< . 1
Claws (Hag Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Change Shape. The hag magically polymorphs into a Small or
Medium female humanoid, or back into her true form. Her
statistics are the same in each form. Any equipment she is
wearing or carrying isn't transformed. She reverts to her true
form if she dies.
Etherealness. The hag magically enters the Ethereal Plane from '.
the Material Plane, or vice versa. To do so, the hag must have a I
heartstone in her possession.
Nightmare Haunting (1/Day). While on the Ethereal Plane, the   I
hag magically touches a sleeping humanoid on the Material
Plane. A protection from evil and good spell cast on the target
prevents this contact, as does a magic circle. As long as the
contact persists, the target has dreadful visions. If these visions
last for at least 1 hour, the target gains no benefit from its rest,
and its hit point maximum is reduced by 5 (ldlO). If this effect   I
reduces the target's hit point maximum to 0, the target dies,
and if the target was evil, its soul is trapped in the hag's soul
bag. The reduction to the target's hit point maximum lasts until
removed by the greater restoration spell or similar magic.
-   •                          -■            -«■■■■-               r.    . i
178

Night Hac Items
A night hag carries two very rare magic items that she must
craft for herself. If either object is lost, the night hag will go
to great lengths to retrieve it, as creating a new tool takes
time and effort.
Heartstone. This lustrous black gem allows a night hag
to become ethereal while it is in her possession. The touch
of a heartstone also cures any disease. Crafting a heartstone
takes 30 days.
Soul Bag. When an evil humanoid dies as a result of a
night hag's Nightmare Haunting, the hag catches the soul
in this black sack made of stitched flesh. A soul bog can hold
only one evil soul at a time, and only the night hag who
crafted the bag can catch a soul with it. Crafting a soul bag
takes 7 days and a humanoid sacrifice (whose flesh is used
to make the bag).
Sea Hag
Sea hags live in dismal and polluted underwater lairs,
surrounded by merrow and other aquatic monsters.
Beauty drives a sea hag to fits of anger. When
confronted with something beautiful, the hag might
simply attack it or deface it. If something beautiful gives
hope, a sea hag wants it to cause despair. If it inspires
courage, the sea hag wants it to cause fear.
Ugly Inside and Out. Sea hags are by far the ugliest
of all hags, with slimy scales covering their pallid skin.
A sea hag's hair resembles seaweed and covers her
emaciated body, and her glassy eyes seem as lifeless
as a doll's. Although a sea hag can hide her true form
under a veil of illusion, the hag is cursed to forever
appear ugly. Her illusory form appears haggard at best.
Covens. A sea hag that is part of a coven (see the "Hag
Covens" sidebar) has a challenge rating of 4 (1,100 XP).
Sea Hag
Medium fey, chaotic evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21)
Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      13 (+1)      16 (+3)      12 (+1)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Aquan, Common, Giant
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
I Amphibious. The hag can breathe air and water.
Horrific Appearance. Any humanoid that starts its turn within
30 feet of the hag and can see the hag's true form must make
1 a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
frightened for 1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if the hag is
within line of sight, ending the effect on itself on a success. If
j a creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
I the creature is immune to the hag's Horrific Appearance for the
< next 24 hours.
Unless the target is surprised or the revelation of the hag's
true form is sudden, the target can avert its eyes and avoid
making the initial saving throw. Until the start of its next turn,
a creature that averts its eyes has disadvantage on attack rolls
against the hag.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Death Clare. The hag targets one frightened creature she can
see within 30 feet of her. If the target can see the hag, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw against this magic or
drop to 0 hit points.
Illusory Appearance. The hag covers herself and anything she
is wearing or carrying with a magical illusion that makes her
look like an ugly creature of her general size and humanoid
shape. The effect ends if the hag takes a bonus action to end it
or if she dies.
The changes wrought by this effect fail to hold up to physical
inspection. For example, the hag could appear to have no
claws, but someone touching her hand might feel the claws.
Otherwise, a creature must take an action to visually inspect
the illusion and succeed on a DC 16 Intelligence (Investigation)
check to discern that the hag is disguised.
179
Half-Red Dragon Veteran
Medium humanoid (human), any alignment
| Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
•    16 (+3)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)      10 (+0)
I Saving Throws Str +5, Con +4
J Skills Athletics +5, Perception +2
I Damage Resistances fire
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
k Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Actions
I Multiattack. The veteran makes two longsword attacks. If it
has a shortsword drawn, it can also make a shortsword attack.
I Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (ldlO + 3)
I slashing damage if used with two hands.
•1 Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
I target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
I Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range
I 100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ldlO + 1) piercing damage.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The veteran exhales fire in a 15-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
I half as much damage on a successful one.
J Reactions__________________________I
I  Parry. The veteran adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack
I  that would hit it. To do so, the veteran must see the attacker
I  and be wielding a melee weapon.
■                                                                             '
HALtf-^RAGON
When a dragon in polymorphed form mates with
another creature, the union sometimes produces half-
dragon offspring. A creature might also transform into
a half-dragon as a result of a mad wizard's spell or a
ritual bath in dragon's blood. In all these cases, the
result is a creature that combines the
essence of a dragon with the form of its
original race. Regardless of their origins, -
all half-dragons have similar features and
appearance, gaining special senses, resistance to
destructive energy, and a breath weapon.
Draconic Nature. Half-dragons are incapable
of having natural born offspring. Those that wish
to propagate must find other ways to do so, almost
always involving magic. By way of compensation, half-
dragons are blessed with long life. Barring unforeseen
misfortune, a typical half-dragon's life expectancy is
twice that of its nondraconic line, so that a half-dragon
human might live more than a century and a half.
Half-dragons inherit personality traits common to
their draconic heritage, so that half-gold dragons are
often shy and secretive, while half-copper dragons are
impish and playful. Half-green dragons are deceitful,
while half-white dragons are often dim-witted brutes.
These traits are tempered by a half-dragon's other
lineage, but greed, arrogance, and paranoia are qualities
that even good-aligned half-dragons often possess.
Half-Dragon Template__________
A beast, humanoid, giant, or monstrosity can become a
half-dragon. When a creature becomes a half-dragon, it
retains all its statistics except as noted below.
Senses. The half-dragon gains blindsight with a
radius of 10 feet and darkvision with a radius of 60 feet.
Resistances. The half-dragon gains resistance to a
type of damage based on its color.
Color
Damage Resistance
Black or copper	Acid
Blue or bronze	Lightning
Brass, gold, or red	Fire
Green	Poison
Silver or white   .	Cold
Languages. The half-dragon speaks Draconic in
addition to any other languages it knows.
New Action: Breath Weapon. The half-dragon has
the breath weapon of its dragon half. The half-dragon's
size determines how this action functions.
Size Large or smaller	Breath Weapon As a wyrmling
Huge i Gargantuan	As a young dragon As an adult dragon
Sample Half-Dragon
Here the half-dragon template has been applied to a
human veteran to create a half-red dragon veteran.
Splint armor has been replaced with plate.

180
I -DRAGON
XT
HARPY
Taking glee in suffering and death, the sadistic harpy
is always on the hunt for prey. Its sweet song has lured
countless adventurers to their deaths, drawing them in
close for the harpy to kill and then consurhe.
A harpy combines the body, legs, and wings of a
vulture with the torso, arms, and head of a human.
Its wicked talons and bone club make it a formidable
threat in combat, and its eyes reflect the absolute evil
of its soul.
Divine Curse. Long ago, an elf wandering a forest
heard birdsong so pure and wholesome that she was
moved to tears. Following the music, she came upon
a clearing where stood a handsome elf youth who had
also paused to hear the bird's song. This was Fenmarel
tylestarine, a reclusive elf god. His divine presence stole
her heart as he fled, vanishing into the woods as if he
was never there.
Though the elf searched the woods and called for her
stranger, she found no sign of his passage. Driven to
despair by her longing, she begged the gods to help her.
Aerdrie Faenya, elf goddess of the sky, heard the elf's
cries and was moved to her aid. She appeared as the
bird whose song had entranced the outcast god, then
taught that song of beauty and seduction to the elf.
When her singing failed to draw Fenmarel Mestarine
to her side, the elf cursed the gods, invoking a dreadful
power and transforming her into the first harpy. The
curse worked its magic on the elf's spirit as well as
her body, turning her desire for love into a hunger for
flesh, even as her beautiful song continued to draw
creatures to her deadly embrace.
Harpy Song. To hear a harpy's song is to hear music
more beautiful than anything else in the world. A
traveler that succumbs to the entrancing effect of that
singing is compelled to blunder toward its source. A
harpy sometimes charms victims before it attacks, but
a more effective use of its song is to lure prey over cliffs,
into bogs and quicksand, or into deadly pits. Creatures
trapped or incapacitated then become easy targets for
the harpy's wrath.
Sadistic Cowards. Harpies haunt bleak coastal cliffs
and other places hazardous to non-flying creatures.
Harpies have no interest in a fair fight, and they
never attack unless they have a clear advantage. If
a fight turns against a harpy, it lacks the cunning to
adapt and will flee and go hungry rather than risk
straight-up combat.
When they attack, harpies play with their food,
delighting in the "music" their victims make as they
scream. A harpy takes its time dismembering a helpless
foe and can spend days torturing a victim before the
merciful end.
Gruesome Collectors. Harpies take shiny baubles,
valuable objects, and other trophies from their victims,
sometimes fighting with each other for the right to claim
the choicest prizes. When no valuable objects can be
found, a harpy takes hair, bones, or body parts to line
its nest. A harpy's lair is usually hidden in remote ruins,
where adventurers can discover valuable treasure and
magic hidden beneath foul piles of offal.
Harpy
Medium moristrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 38 (7d8 + 7)
Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
'12 (+1)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The harpy makes two attacks: one with its claws
and one with its club.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage.
Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Luring Song. The harpy sings a magical melody. Every
humanoid and giant within 300 feet of the harpy that can hear
the song must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or
be charmed until the song ends. The harpy must take a bonus
action on its subsequent turns to continue singing. It can stop
singing at any time. The song ends if the harpy is incapacitated.
While charmed by the harpy, a target is incapacitated and
ignores the songs of other harpies. If the charmed target is
more than 5 feet away from the harpy, the target can take
the Dash action on its turn to move toward the harpy by the
most direct route. It doesn't avoid opportunity attacks, but
before moving into damaging terrain, such as lava or a pit, and
whenever it takes damage from a source other than the harpy,
a target can repeat the saving throw. A creature can also repeat
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns. If a creature's
saving throw is successful, the effect ends on it.
A target that successfully saves is immune to this harpy's
song for the next 24 hours.
Hell Hound
Monstrous, fire-breathing fiends that take the form of
powerful dogs, hell hounds are found on the battlefields
of Acheron and throughout the Lower Planes. On the
Material Plane, hell hounds are most commonly seen
in service to devils, fire giants, and other evil creatures
that use them as guard animals and companions.
Burning Hunger. Hell hounds hunt in packs, feeding
on any creature that appears edible. They avoid
potentially dangerous foes in favor of targeting the
weakest prey with their savage bite and fiery breath,
demonstrating a relentless determination as they pursue
that prey to the bitter end.
When hell hounds feed, the flesh they consume stokes
the infernal fires that burn within them. When a hell
hound dies, that fire consumes the creature's remains
in a billowing eruption of smoke and blazing embers,
leaving nothing behind but scorched tufts of black fur.
Evil to the Core. Hell hounds are smarter than
mundane beasts, and their lawful nature makes them
good at following orders. However, a hell hound's evil
disposition means that the creature can't be trained to
be anything other than a ruthless killer. If a hell hound
isn't allowed to indulge its malevolent hunger, it quickly
abandons or turns against its master.
Hellhound
Medium fiend, lawful evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)       12 (+1)      14 (+2)       6 (-2)      13 (+1)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +5
Damage Immunities fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages understands Infernal but can't speak it
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The hound has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Pack Tactics. The hound has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the hound's allies is within 5
feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage.
Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The hound exhales fire in a 15-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 12 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 21 (6d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.

T8z
ii i I.:   HOUND
s

r
Helmed Horror
This construct possesses intelligence, the ability
to reason and adjust its tactics, and an unswerving
devotion to its maker that persists even after its
maker's demise. Resembling an animated suit of
empty plate armor, a helmed horror serves without
ambition or emotion.
Magical Purpose. Though it takes more magical
resources to create a helmed horror than a lesser
suit of animated armor, the helmed horror requires
less direction and maintenance as it carries out its
appointed tasks. A helmed horror follows its orders
with complete loyalty, and is intelligent enough to
understand the difference between an order's intent and
its exact wording. Unlike many constructs, it seeks to
fulfill the former rather than slavishly follow the latter.
Tactical Cunning. A helmed horror fights with
the cunning of a skilled warrior, taking to the air as
it attacks weaker characters and spellcasters first.
]   However, a helmed horror lacks the insight to change
its environment, fortify it, or otherwise take active
measures to improve its defensive position.
Constructed Nature. A helmed horror doesn't
require air, food, drink, or sleep.
Helmed Horror
Medium construct, neutral
Armor Class 20 (plate, shield)
Hit Points 60 (8d8 + 24)
I Speed 30 ft, fly 30 ft.
STR
18 (+4)
DEX
13 (+1)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
10 (+0)
WIS
10 (+0)
j Skills Perception +4
i Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons that aren't adamantine
I Damage Immunities force, necrotic, poison
1 Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 14
: Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
j Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
• Magic Resistance. The helmed horror has advantage on saving
[ throws against spells and other magical effects.
I Spell Immunity. The helmed horror is immune to three spells
1 chosen by its creator. Typical immunities include^irefao//, heat
metal, and lightning bolt.
I Actions
Multiattack. The helmed horror makes two longsword attacks
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (ldlO + 4)
slashing damage if used with two hands.
*-                                ■
^-aw:-,lhkfca
uh-j.
^J&khtf
Hippogriff
Large monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 11
HitPointsl9(3dlO+3)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
'17 (+3)       13 (+1)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       8 (-1)
Hippogriff
A beast whose magical origins are lost to history, a
hippogriff possesses the wings and forelimbs of an
eagle, the hindquarters of a horse, and a head that
combines the features of both animals.
Reclusive and omnivorous, hippogriffs mate for life
and seldom venture more than a few miles from their
nest. When defending its mate or its young, a hippogriff
fights to the death. Hippogriffs don't lay eggs but give
birth to live young.
Dragons, griffons, and wyverns have a taste for
hippogriff meat and frequently prey on these creatures.
Flying Mounts. A hippogriff raised in captivity can be
trained to be a faithful companion and mount. Of all the
creatures that can serve as flying mounts, hippogriffs
are among the easiest to train and the most loyal once
trained properly.
Skills Perception +5
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Sight. The hippogriff has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Muitiattack. The hippogriff makes two attacks: one with its
beak and one with its claws.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ldlO + 3) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
1^     .i-Wl.'!;:'.-"^'-^^".      ■^■^^JI^tiJLs^A.Ji^M^toj-jfcfcMgBMtl
iH
^m-
nri'Pni
\
r

Hobgoblins
War horns sound, stones fly from catapults, and the
thunder of a thousand booted feet echoes across
the land as hobgoblins march to battle. Across the
borderlands of civilization, settlements and settlers
must contend with these aggressive humanoids, whose
thirst for conquest is never satisfied.
Hobgoblins have dark orange or red-orange skin, and
hair ranging from dark red-brown to dark gray. Yellow
or dark brown eyes peer out beneath their beetling
brows, and their wide mouths sport sharp and yellowed
teeth. A male hobgoblin might have a large blue or red
nose, which symbolizes virility and power among
goblinkin. Hobgoblins can live as long as humans,
though their love of warfare and battle means
that few do.
Goblinoids. Hobgoblins belong to a family of
creatures called goblinoids. They are often found
lording over their cousins, the smaller goblins and the
ferocious bugbears.
Martial Might. A hobgoblin measures virtue by
physical strength and martial prowess, caring about
■nothing except the opportunity to demonstrate skill
and cunning in battle. Hobgoblins of high military
rank attain their positions by force, then hold those
positions by imposing their authority through
draconian measures.
Hobgoblins train to fight with a variety of weapons,
and have great skill at crafting arms, armor, siege
engines* and other military devices. Organized and
disciplined, they take exceptional care oftheir weapons,
armor, and personal possessions. They favor the bold
colors associated with their tribes, and trim their
often-elaborate uniforms with blood-red piping and
leather dyed black.
Military Legions. Hobgoblins organize themselves
into tribal bands known as legions. In their martial
society, every hobgoblin has a rank, from the powerful
leaders and champions, to the rank-and-file foot
soldiers, to the goblins that find themselves driven
into the front lines at spear point. A legion is headed
by a warlord with several captains serving under its
command. A hobgoblin warlord is a ruthless tyrant
more interested in strategy, victory, glory, reputation,
and dominion than leading troops into battle.
As loyal and disciplined as hobgoblins are in their
own legion, rival legions compete constantly for
reputation and status. Meetings between legions
erupt in violence if troops aren't restrained, and only
exceptionally powerful leaders can force legions to
cooperate on the battlefield.
Strategic Thinkers. Hobgoblins have a strong grasp
of tactics and discipline, and can carry out sophisticated!
battle plans under the direction of a strategically
minded leader. However, they hate elves and attack
them first in battle over any other opponents, even if
doing so would be a tactical error.
Legions often supplement their ranks with less
reliable and more expendable troops, including goblins,
bugbears, ores, evil humans, ogres, and giants.
Beast Trainers. Hobgoblins have a long history of
training animals to service. Like the more civilized
races, they use oxen and horses to transport goods
and weaponry over long distances. They communicate
with each other using trained ravens, and keep vicious
wolves to guard prisoners and protect hobgoblin camps.
Hobgoblin cavalry use trained worgs as steeds, in the
same way that goblins ride wolves. Some tribes even
keep carnivorous apes as fighting beasts.
Conquer and Control. Hobgoblins claim lands
with abundant resources, and they can be found in
forests and mountains, near mines and humanoid
settlements, and anywhere else that wood, metal, and
potential slaves can be found. They build and conquer
strongholds' in strategically advarifa*geous|l<3catt6iis,'
which they theji use as staging areas to expand
theft territory.
Hobgoblin warlords never tire of combat, but
they don't take up arms lightly. Before they attack,
hobgoblins conduct thorough reconnaissance to gauge
the strengths and weaknesses of their foes. When
assaulting a stronghold, they surround it first to cut off
escape routes and supply lines, then slowly starve their
enemies out.
Hobgoblins fortify their own holdings, bolstering
existing defenses with innovations of their own.
Whether they lair in cavern complexes, dungeons,
ruins, or forests, they protect their strongholds with
ditches, fences, gates, guard towers, pit traps, and crude
catapults or ballistas.
Legion ofMaglubiyet. Hobgoblins worship
Maglubiyet the Mighty One, the greater god of
goblinoids. As terrifying as this figure is, hobgoblins
don't fear death, believing that when they die in battle,
their spirits join the honored ranks of Maglubiyet's army
on the plane of Acheron.
The.r home IS OURS TO
THE.R CHILDREN OUR SLAVES.
ACHERON.'  ACHERON-
V,ctorv is oors.              _TraNSlAt.oM OF A
I ■         ,        ■     ,    =
Hobgoblin Captain
Medium humanoid (goblinoid), lawful evil
Armor Class 17 (half plate)
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
Speed 30 ft.
Hobgoblin
Medium humanoid (goblinoid), lawful evil
,  -   ■   „-'
riM^
Armor Class 18 (chain mail, shield)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      12 (+1)      12 (+1)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      9 (-1)
. Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
• Languages Common, Goblin
I Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can deal an
extra 7 (2d6) damage to a creature it hits with a weapon attack
; if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally of the hobgoblin that
.] isn't incapacitated.
; Actions
i Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
'; target. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) slashing damage, or 6 (ldlO + 1)
I slashing damage if used with two hands.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage.
STR
15 (+2)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      14 (+2)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)     10 (+0)      13 (+1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can deal
an extra 10 (3d6) damage to a creature it hits with a weapon
; attack if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally of the hobgoblin
that isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The hobgoblin makes two greatsword attacks.
Creatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Leadership (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1
minute, the hobgoblin can utter a special command or warning
whenever a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet
I of it makes an attack roll or a saving throw. The creature can
add a d4 to its roll provided it can hear and understand the
; hobgoblin. A creature can benefit from only one Leadership die
at a time. This effect ends if the hobgoblin is incapacitated.
186
-..'
HOBGOBLINS

u
±y
V
Hobgoblin Warlord
Medium humanoid (goblinoid), lawful evil
Armor Class 20 (plate, shield)
Hit Points 97 (13d8 + 39)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      14 (+2)      16 (+3)      14 (+2)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +3, Cha +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can deal an
extra 14 (4d6) damage to a creature it hits with a weapon attack
' if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally of the hobgoblin that
' isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The hobgoblin makes three melee attacks.
Alternatively, it can make two ranged attacks with its javelins.
----■---------                           '            ----------------
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft.,.o.rte
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (IdlO + 3)
slashing damage if used with two hands.
Shield Bash. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is
Large or smaller, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving
throw or be knocked prone.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft. or i
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Leadership (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1
minute, the hobgoblin can utter a special command or warning
whenever a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet
of it makes an attack roll or a saving throw. The creature can
add a d4 to its roll provided it can hear and understand the
hobgoblin. A creature can benefit from only one Leadership die
at a time. This effect ends if the hobgoblin is incapacitated.
Reactions____________________________
Parry. The hobgoblin adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack
that would hit it. To do so, the hobgoblin must see the attacker
and be wielding a melee weapon.

187
Homunculus
Shaping a mixture of clay, ash, mandrake root, and
blood, one can channel rare ritual magic to create a
faithful, squirrel-sized companion.
A homunculus is a construct that acts as an extension
of its creator, with the two sharing thoughts, senses,
and language through a mystical bond. A master can
have only one homunculus at a time (attempts to create
another one always fail), and when its master dies, the
homunculus also dies.
Shared Mind. A homunculus knows everything its
creator knows, including all the languages the creator
can speak and read. Likewise, everything the construct
senses is known to its master, even over great distances,
provided both are on the same plane. Functioning as a
spy, a scout, an emissary, or a messenger, a homunculus
is an invaluable servant for a spellcaster engaged in
secret experimentation or adventuring.
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Telepathic Bond. While the homunculus is on the same
plane of existence as its master, it can magically convey
what it senses to its master, and the two can communicate
telepathically.
Actions_____________________________^
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must succeed on
a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1
minute. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target is
instead poisoned for 5 (ldlO) minutes and unconscious while
poisoned in this way.

188
'it.US
■j HOOI^IIORROR
t-Oi Large rnoiistrosity, neutral
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 75 (lOdlO + 20)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)     10 (+0)     15 (+2)       6 (-2)      12 (+1)      7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
,' Senses blindsight 60 ft, darkvision 10 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Hook Horror
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
I Echolocation. The hook horror can't use its blindsight
I while deafened.
' Keen Hearing. The hook horror has advantage on Wisdom
i (Perception) checks that rely on hearing.
Actions
Multiattack. The hook horror makes two hook attacks.
Hook. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
^gp^ga
A fierce predator of the Underdark, the hook horror
aggressively defends its hunting grounds. The
subterranean caverns where these creatures dwell echo
with the constant clacking and scraping of their hooks
as they wend their way up cliffs and along cavern walls.
The monstrous hook horror has a head resembling a
vulture's and the torso of an enormous beetle, with an
exoskeleton studded by sharp, bony protuberances. It
gains its name from its long, powerfully built arms and
legs, which end in wickedly curved hooked claws.
Echoes in the Dark. Hook horrors communicate by
striking their hooks against their exoskeletons or the
stone surfaces around them. What sounds to others like
random clacking noise is actually a complex language
that only hook horrors understand, and which carries
for miles through the echoing Underdark.
Pack Predators. The omnivorous hook horrors eat
lichens, fungi, plants, and any creature they can catch.
A hook horror's hooked limbs give it excellent purchase
on rock surfaces, and these creatures use their
climbing skills to ambush prey from above. They hunt
in packs, working together against the largest and most
dangerous opponents. If a battle goes poorly, a hook
horror quickly climbs a cavern wall to flee.
Dedicated Clans. Hook horrors live in extended
family groups or clans. Each clan is ruled by the eldest
female, who typically places her mate in charge of
the clan's hunters. Hook horrors lay eggs, which are',
clustered in a central, well-defended area of a clan's
home caverns.
-
aaa
'^•■UA —-■ —
KHORROR
■-■-----°e~
I$9
Hydra
The hydra is a reptilian horror with a crocodilian body
and multiple heads on long, serpentine necks. Although
its heads can be severed, the hydra magically regrows
them in short order. A typical specimen has five heads.
At the dawn of time, Tiamat, the Queen of Evil
Dragons, slew a rival dragon god named Lernaea and
cast her blood across the multiverse. Each drop that fell
upon a world spawned a multi-headed hydra consumed
by a hunger as great as the fallen god's hatred. Great
champions are known to test their mettle against these
fearsome creatures.
Everlasting Hunger. A rapacious and gluttonous
monster, a hydra snatches and tears apart its prey in a
frenzy of feeding. When a hydra has cleared a territory
of food and driven off any creatures smart enough to
avoid it, it moves on to seek its meals elsewhere. A
hydra's hunger is so great that if it can't feed, it might
turn against itself, its heads attacking each other as the
creature eats itself alive.
Hardy Water Dwellers. Hydras are natural
swimmers, dwelling in rivers, along lakeshores, in
ocean shallows, and in wetland bogs. A hydra rarely
requires shelter from the elements, so it doesn't
normally have a lair. Only in colder climes are hydras
drawn to the protection of sheltered caverns and ruins.
When a hydra sleeps, at least one of its heads remains
awake and alert, making the creature difficult to catch
by surprise.
f /*>
Hydra
Huge monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 172 (15dl2 +75)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR
- 20 (+5)
DEX
12 (+1)
CON
20 (+5)
INT
2 (-4)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
7 (-2)
' Skills Perception +6
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16
i Languages —
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)

Hold Breath. The hydra can hold its breath for 1 hour.
Multiple Heads. The hydra has five heads. While it has more
than one head, the hydra has advantage on saving throws
against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened,
stunned, and knocked unconscious.
Whenever the hydra takes 25 or more damage in a single
turn, one of its heads dies. If all its heads die, the hydra dies.
At the end of its turn, it grows two heads for each of its heads
that died since its last turn, unless it has taken fire damage
since its last turn. The hydra regains 10 hit points for each head
regrown in this way.
Reactive Heads. For each head the hydra has beyond
one, it gets an extra reaction that can be used only for
opportunity attacks.
190
MP
«JE „AV6 NO INtENIWN OF
Lm'' CRV-                  ,     „,,• YOUR BRAIN
P     • VOURBRMN. IN FACT, YOUR
*VH        oNAWONOeRFUL.OORNE.V.'
Intellect Devourer
An intellect devourer resembles a walking brain i*h
protected by a crusty covering and set on bestial clawed
legs. This foul aberration feeds on the intelligence of
sentient creatures, taking over a victim's body on behalf
of its mind flayer masters.
Illithid Creations. Mind flayers breed intellect'
devourers to serve as roaming hunters of the
Underdark, creating an intellect devourer by taking the
brain of a thrall and subjecting it to a horrible ritual. As
it sprouts legs, the brain becomes an intelligent predator
as twisted and evil as its masters.
Deadly Puppet Masters. An intellect devourer
consumes a creature's mind and memories, then turns
the host body into a puppet under its control. An intellect
devourer typically uses its puppet host to lure others
into the domain of the mind flayers to be enthralled
or consumed.
Intellect Devourer
Tiny aberration, lawful evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 21 (6d4 + 6)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
6 (-2)       14 (+2)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)     11 (+0)     10 (+0)
, Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities blinded
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 12
i Languages understands Deep Speech but can't speak,
|    telepathy 60 ft.
I Challenge 2 (450 XP)
■ Detect Sentience. The intellect devourer can sense the
presence and location of any creature within 300 feet of it that
has an Intelligence of 3 or higher, regardless of interposing
barriers, unless the creature is protected by a mind blank spell.
Actions                      ______________
Multiattack. The intellect devourer makes one attack with its
claws and uses Devour Intellect.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit-, reach 5 ft,, one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Devour Intellect. The intellect devourer targets one creature
it can see within 10 feet of it that has a brain. The target must
succeed on a DC 12 Intelligence saving throw against this
magic or take 11 (2dl0) psychic damage. Also on a failure,
roll 3d6: If the total equals or exceeds the target's Intelligence
score, that score is reduced to 0. The target is stunned until it
regains at least one point of Intelligence.
Body Thief. The intellect devourer initiates an Intelligence
contest with an incapacitated humanoid within 5 feet of it. If
it wins the contest, the intellect devourer magically consumes
the target's brain, teleports into the target's skull, and takes
control of the target's body. While inside a creature, the
intellect devourer has total cover against attacks and other
effects originating outside its host. The intellect devourer
retains its Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as
well as its understanding of Deep Speech, its telepathy, and
its traits. It otherwise adopts the target's statistics. It knows
everything the creature knew, including spells and languages.
If the host body drops to 0 hit points, the intellect devourer
must leave it. A protection from evil and good spell cast on the
body drives the intellect devourer out. The intellect devourer
is also forced out if the target regains its devoured brain by
means of a wish. By spending 5 feet of its movement, the
intellect devourer can voluntarily leave the body, teleporting to
the nearest unoccupied space within 5 feet of it. The body then
dies, unless its brain is restored within 1 round.
19*
I Invisible Stalker
Medium elemental, neutral
————
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 104 (16d8+ 32)
Speed 50 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      19 (+4)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)     15 (+2)      11 (+0)
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +10
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Auran, understands Common but doesn't speak it
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)

Invisibility. The stalker is invisible.
Faultless Tracker. The stalker is given a quarry by its
summoner. The stalker knows the direction and distance to
its quarry as long as the two of them are on the same plane of
existence. The stalker also knows the location of its summoner.
Actions
Multiattack. The stalker makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Invisible Stalker
An invisible stalker is an air elemental that has been
summoned from its native plane and transformed
by powerful magic. Its sole purpose is to hunt down
creatures and retrieve objects for its summoner. When
it is defeated or the magic that binds it expires, an
invisible stalker vanishes in a gust of wind.
Directed Hunter. When an invisible stalker is created,
it stays at its summoner's side until it is given a task to
perform. If an assignment doesn't involve hunting down
. and slaying a specific creature or recovering an object,
the magic that created the invisible stalker ends and
the elemental is released. Otherwise, it completes the
task, then returns to its summoner for more commands,
forced to serve until the magic that binds it expires. If
its summoner dies in the interim, the invisible stalker
vanishes after completing its task.
An invisible stalker is an unwilling servant at best.
It resents any undertaking assigned to it. A mission
that requires significant time might drive the invisible
stalker to pervert the intent of a command unless it is
worded carefully.
Unseen Threat. Invisible stalkers are composed of alfi
and are naturally invisible. A creature might hear and
feel an invisible stalker in passing, but the elemental
remains invisible even when it attacks. A spell that
allows someone to see the invisible reveals only the
invisible stalker's vague outline.
Elemental Nature. An invisible stalker requires no
air, food, drink, or sleep.
T92
J(J?yiSlBLE STALKBfc

'»j«Bk07kGu[|'!BSW a '■"■I!
'■■■?-.«
JAGKALWERE
Medium humanoid (shapechanger), chaotic evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 18 (4d8)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      15 (+2)      11 (+0)      13 (+1)     11 (+0)     10 (+0)
Skills Deception +4, Perception +2, Stealth +4
Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from
nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Common (can't speak in jackal form)
| Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
I Shapechanger. The jackalwere can use its action to polymorph
/ into a specific Medium human or a jackal-humanoid hybrid, or
Ei back into its true form (that of a Small jackal). Other than its
[ size, its statistics are the same in each form. Any equipment
I it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true
I form if it dies.
r
Jackalwere
Ordinary jackals tainted by demonic power, jackalweres
haunt roads and trails, waylaying and murderirie
those they meet.
A jackalwere has three physical forms that it shifts
between. In its true form, it is indistinguishable
from a normal jackal. It can take human form, often
appearing gaunt and affecting a wretched demeanor to
beg goodwill from strangers. When travelers welcome
a jackalwere into their midst, the monster adopts its
human-sjzed hybrid form, with the fur and head of a
jackal but standing on two legs as it attacks.
Beguilers and Cowards. The demon lord Graz'zt
created jackalweres to serve his devoted servants, the
lamias. Reaching out from the Abyss, he bestowed
jackals with the gift of speech and the ability to assume
humanoid forms. A jackalwere is born to lie, and
perceptive creatures might notice it wincing in pain
when it speaks the truth.
A jackalwere prefers to fight alongside jackals and
others of its kind. Under the direction of jackalweres,
jackals are fierce and loyal companions.
Supernatural Servants. Jackalweres kidnap
humanoids for their lamia masters, condemning
victims to a lifetime of slavery or an agonizing death, A
jackalwere's magical gaze renders a foe unconscious,
allowing the monster to bind a creature or drag it away.
A jackalwere might also use its gaze to incapacitate a
[deadly enemy long enough to make good its escape.
Keen Hearing and Smell. The jackalwere has advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely orfhearing of smell.
Pack Tactics. The jackalwere has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the jackalwere's allies is
within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
AcflONS_______,______. '^ '.          ^       "'■     . '
Bite (Jackal or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Scimitar (Human or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2)
slashing damage.
Sleep Gaze. The jackalwere gazes at one creature it can see
within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 10 Wisdom
saving throw. On a failed save, the target succumbs to a
magical slumber, falling unconscious for 10 minutes or until
someone uses an action to shake the target awake. A creature
that successfully saves against the effect is immune to this
jackalwere's gaze for the next 24 hours. Undead and creatures
immune to being charmed aren't affected by it.
E3£-^^S^

■■>»^'  ■..■JMMty
193

Jma£.
Kenku
Medium humanoid (kertku), chaotie 'neutral
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      16 (+3)      10 (+0)      11 (+0)     10 (+0)     10 (+0)
Skills Deception +4, Perception +2, Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 12
I Languages understands Auran and Common but speaks only
through the use of its Mimicry trait
1 Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Ambusher. The kenku has advantage on attack rolls against any
creature it has surprised.
Mimicry. The kenku can mimic any sounds it has heard,
I including voices. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they   I
I are imitations with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check.
-
, Actions
i94
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack; +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
.     k E N KU
Kenku
^>
Kenku are feathered humanoids that wander the world
as vagabonds, driven by greed. They can perfectly
imitate any sound they hear.
Fallen Flocks. Kenku wear ill-fitting cloaks, robes,
and rags. These garments cover the soft, sleek feathers
of their bodies, shrouding their bare arms and legs.
They tread lightly when they walk, on talons made for
grasping the branches of trees and seizing prey from the
lofty skies. Soft as the wind they move, so as not to draw
attention to their shameful forms.
Once, the kenku held the wind in their wings,
embracing the gusty sky and singing the sweet language
of birdsong. Serving a master whose identity is now
lost to their memory, the kenku coveted the glittering
baubles of his household, and longed to speak so
that they could cajole and swindle others out of such
treasures. Stealing the secret of speech from a volume
in their master's library, they disguised themselves
in rags to beg for pretty things. When their master
learned of their greed, he stripped away their wings as
punishment, forcing them to beg forever.
Speech in Pantomime. Kenku can mimic the sound
of anything they hear. A kenku asking for money might
make the sound of coins clinking together, and a
kenku referring to a busy marketplace can reproduce
the cacophony of hawking vendors, barking dogs,
bleating sheep, and the cries of street urchins. When
mimicking voices, they can only repeat words and
phrases they have heard, not create new sentences.
To converse with a kenku is to witness a performance of
imitated sounds and almost nonsensical verse.
Kenku speak to one another in much the same
way. Because they are adept at interpreting one
another's glances and gestures, the sounds they make
to communicate complex ideas or emotions can be
succinct. Groups of kenku also develop secret codes.
For example, a cat's meow might be the secret code for
"Prepare to attack!" or "Flee for your lives!"
Their talent for mimicry extends to handwriting, and
criminal organizations often employ kenku to forge
documents. When a kenku commits a crime, it might
forge evidence to implicate another creature.
The Wistful Wingless. All kenku pine for the ability
to fly, and thus the punishments they mete out to one
another often involve false wings, such as heavy wings
of wood borne as a mark of shame. As a final, tragic
reminder of the wings they once had, kenku carry
out executions by hurling their condemned from tall
buildings or cliffs.
coRP°B.


s
Kobolds
Kobolds are craven reptilian humanoids that worship
evil dragons as demigods and serve them-as minions
and toadies. Kobolds inhabit dragons' lairs when they
can but more commonly infest dungeons, gathering
treasures and trinkets to add to their own tiny hoards.
Strength in Numbers. Kobolds are egg-laying
■   creatures. They mature quickly and can live to be
"great wyrms" more than a century old. However,
many kobolds perish before they reach the end of
their first decade. Physically weak, they are easy prey
for predators. This vulnerability forces them to band
together. Their superior numbers can win battles
against powerful adversaries, but often with massive
casualties on the kobold side.
Tunnelers and Builders. Kobolds make up for their
physical ineptitude with a cleverness for trap making
and tunneling. Their lairs consist of low tunnels
through which they move easily but which hinder larger
humanoids. Kobolds also riddle their lairs with traps.
The most insidious kobold traps make use of natural
hazards and other creatures. A trip wire might connect
to a spring-loaded trap that hurls clay pots of flesh-
eating green slime or flings crates of venomous giant
centipedes at intruders.
The Lost God. In addition to the dragons they revere,
kobolds worship a lesser god named Kurtulmak.
Legends speak of how Kurtulmak served as Tiamat's
vassal in the Nine Hells until Garl Glittergold, the god
of gnomes, stole a trinket from the Dragon Queen's
hoard. Tiamat sent Kurtulmak to retrieve the trinket,
Winged Kobold
Small humanoid (kobold),-lawful evil
d^———
) Armor Class 13
Hit Points 7 (3d6 - 3)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
7 (-2)
DEX         CON
16 (+3)       9 (-1)
INT          WIS
8 (-1)       7 (-2)
CHA
8(-l)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kobold's allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage.
Dropped Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
one target directly below the kobold. Hit: 6 (ld6 -t 3)
bludgeoning damage.
but Garl Glittergold played a trick on him, collapsing tfiie^
earth and trapping the kobold god in an underground
maze for eternity. For this reason, kobolds hate gnomes
and pranks of any kind. Kurtulmak's most devoted
worshipers dedicate themselves to finding an<J releasing
their lost god from his prison-maze.
Winged Kobolds. A few kobolds are born with
leathery wings and can fly. Known
as urds, they like to lurk on high
ledges and drop rocks
on passersby. Although
the urds' wings are seen
as gifts from Tiamat, the
Dragon Queen, wingless
kobolds are envious of
those gifts and don't get
along with the urds.
Kobold
Smgll humanoid (kobold), lawful evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 5 (2d6 - 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
7 (-2)       15 (+2)       9(-l)        8(-l)       7 (-2)        8 (-1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kobold's allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
=3      c
195
Kraken
Beneath the waves, the kraken sleeps for untold
ages, awaiting some fell sign or calling. Land-born
mortals who sail the open sea forget the reasons their
ancestors dreaded the ocean, even as the races of the
deep ignore strange gaps in their histories when their
civilizations nearly vanished after the appearance of the
tentacled horror.
Leviathans of Legend. At the beginning of time,
krakens served as fierce warriors of the gods. When the
gods' wars ended, the krakens shrugged free of their
servitude, never again to be bound by other beings.
Whole nations quake in fear when the kraken emerges
from its dark demesne, and even in the middle of the
deepest oceans, storms rise or abate according to its
will. The kraken is a primeval force that obliterates
the greatest achievements of civilization as if they
were castles in the sand. Its devastating attacks can
destroy ocean trade and halt communication between
coastal cities.
An ominous darkness presages a kraken's attack,
and a cloud of inky poison colors the water around it.
Galleons and warships vanish when its tentacles uncoil
from the deep, the kraken breaking their masts like
kindling before drawing down ships and crew.
Not even landlocked surface dwellers are safe from
a kraken's wrath. Krakens can breathe air as easily as
water, and some crawl up rivers to nest in freshwater
lakes, destroying cities and towns along the way.
Adventurers tell of these monsters lairing in the ruins of
lakeside citadels, their tentacles twined around leaning
towers of disintegrating stone.
Mortal Foes. Some krakens are virtual gods, with
cults and minions spread across sea and land. Others
are allied with Olhydra, the evil Princess of Elemental
Water, and use her cultists to enforce their will on land
and sea. A kraken pleased with its worshipers can
becalm rough seas and bring a bounteous harvest of fish
to the faithful. However, the devious mind of a kraken is
ancient beyond reckoning, and is ultimately bent to the
ruination of all things.
A Kraken's Lair_________________.■
A kraken lives in dark depths, usually a sunken rift or a
cavern filled with detritus, treasure, and wrecked ships.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the
kraken takes a lair action to cause one of the following
magical effects:
•  A strong current moves through the kraken's lair.
Each creature within 60 feet of the kraken must suc-
ceed on a DC 23 Strength saving throw or be pushed
up to 60 feet away from the kraken. On a success, the
creature is pushed 10 feet away from the kraken.
•   Creatures in the water within 60 feet of the kraken
have vulnerability to lightning damage until initiative
count 20 on the next round.
•   The water in the kraken's lair becomes electrically
charged. All creatures within 120 feet of the kraken
must succeed on a DC 23 Constitution saving throw,

lj&
s.
taking 10 (3d6) lightning damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
Regional Effects
The region containing a kraken's lair is waf ped by the
creature's blasphemous presence, creating the following
magical effects:
•  The kraken can alter the weather at will in a 6-mile
radius centered on its lair. The effect is identical to the
control weather spell.
. Water elementals coalesce within 6 miles of the lair.
These elementals can't leave the water and have
Intelligence and Charisma scores of 1 (-5).
•  Aquatic creatures within 6 miles of the lair that have
an Intelligence score of 2 or lower are charmed by the
kraken and aggressive toward intruders in the area.
When the kraken dies, all of these regional effects fade
immediately.
Kraken
Gargantuan monstrosity (than), chaotic evil
, Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 472 (27d20 + 189)
Speed 20 ft., swim 60 ft.

STR           DEX         CON
30 (+10)     11 (+0)      25 (+7)
INT          WIS
22 (+6)     18 (+4)
CHA
20 (+5)
Saving Throws Str +18, Dex +8, Con +15, Int +14, Wis +12
Damage Immunities lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities frightened, paralyzed
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14
\ Languages understands Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal, and
Primordial but can't speak, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP)
Amphibious. The kraken can breathe air and water.
Freedom of Movement. The kraken ignores difficult terrain,
and magical effects can't reduce its speed or cause it to be
restrained. It can spend 5 feet of movement to escape from
nonmagical restraints or being grappled.
Siege Monster. The kraken deals double damage to objects and
structures.
Actions
Multiattack. The kraken makes three tentacle attacks, each of
which it can replace with one use of Fling.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 23 (3d8 + 10) piercing damage. If the target is a Large
or smaller creature grappled by the kraken, that creature
is swallowed, and the grapple ends. While swallowed, the
creature is blinded and restrained, it has total cover against
attacks and other effects outside the kraken, and it takes 42
(12d6) acid damage at the start of each of the kraken's turns.
If the kraken takes 50 damage or more on a single turn
from a creature inside it, the kraken must succeed on a DC 25
'■-■■    '' ■-         "                            -
wmnw-a^K—
Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate
all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10
feet of the kraken. If the kraken dies, a swallowed creature is no
longer restrained by it and can escape from the corpse using 15
feet of movement, exiting prone.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 30 ft., one
target. Hit: 20 (3d6 + 10) bludgeoning damage, and the target
is grappled (escape DC 18). Until this grapple ends, the target
is restrained. The kraken has ten tentacles, each of which can
grapple one target.
Fling. One Large or smaller object held or creature grappled
by the kraken is thrown up to 60 feet in a random direction
and knocked prone. If a thrown target strikes a solid surface,
the target takes 3 (ld6) bludgeoning damage for every 10 feet
it was thrown. If the target is thrown at another creature, that
creature must succeed on a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw or
take the same damage and be knocked prone.
Lightning Storm. The kraken magically creates three bolts of
lightning, each of which can strike a target the kraken can see
within 120 feet of it. A target must make a DC 23 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0) lightning damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Legendary Actions____________________
The kraken can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
kraken regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Tentacle Attack or Fling. The kraken makes one tentacle attack
or uses its Fling.
Lightning Storm (Costs 2 Actions). The kraken uses
Lightning Storm.
Ink Cloud (Costs 3 Actions). While underwater, the kraken
expels an ink cloud in a 60-foot radius. The cloud spreads
around corners, and that area is heavily obscured to
creatures other than the kraken. Each creature other than
the kraken that ends its turn there must succeed on a DC 23
Constitution saving throw, taking 16 (3dl0) poison damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful
one. A strong current disperses the cloud, which otherwise
disappears at the end of the kraken's next turn.
197

■r
L
I

IvUO~TOA
Kuo-toa are degenerate fishlike humanoids that
once inhabited the shores and islands of the surface
world. Long ago humans and their ilk drove the kuo-
toa underground, where they dwell in madness and
everlasting night. Kuo-toa can no longer abide daylight.
Mad Slaves. At the height of the illithid empire; the
mind flayers captured kuo-toa by the thousands and
forced them into bondage. The kuo-toa were simple
creatures, never meant to endure the oppressive mental
force the illithids unleashed against them. By the
time the mind flayers abandoned them, the prolonged
psychic subjugation endured by the kuo-toa had
driven them mad.
Their minds shattered beyond repair, the kuo-toa
adopted a religious fervor, inventing gods to protect
them against threats. Most notable of these threats are
the drow, which have slain the kuo-toa on sight since the
days when the two races first met.
God Makers. Kuo-toa worship gods of their own
insane creation, but if enough kuo-toa believe that a god
is real, the energy of their collective subconscious can
cause that god to manifest as a physical entity. The form
a kuo-toa god takes depends on the inspiration for its
divine image, and is usually random or nonsensical.
One of the most revered gods of the kuo-toa is
Blibdoolpoolp the Sea Mother, who takes the form
of a female human with a crayfish head, a crayfish's
claws, and an articulated shell .covering her shoulders.
Blibdoolpoolp was likely invented by a kuo-toa that
improved on a broken human statue by adding the
limbs and head of a crustacean. In sudden awe of its
handiwork, it then named the resulting form a god.
Kuo-toa that cross paths with an aboleth often find
themselves worshiping it as a god, their madness
blinding them to the fact that the aboleth is merely using
them for its own nefarious ends.
Theocratic Rulers. Kuo-toa archpriests are
surrounded by fanatical devotees of their faith. The
archpriest of a kuo-toa domain demands that all its
subjects worship a specific god. An archpriest's mad
belief in its god is so fervent that it manifests the powers
of a high cleric. The archpriest can also bestow spells
to devout underlings called whips. One or more of
^__________________________________________k.
Variant: Kuo-toa Monitor
A kuo-toa monitor has a challenge rating of 3 (700 XP). It
has the same statistics as a kuo-toa whip except that it adds
its Wisdom modifier to its Armor Class (AC 13), loses the
Spellcaster trait, and replaces the whip's action options with
the following action options.
Multiattack. The kuo-toa makes one bite attack and two
unarmed strikes.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 * 2) piercing damage.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (ld6)
lightning damage, and the target can't take reactions until
1 the end of the kuo-toa's next turn.

thes& whips are also the archpriest's children, and their
primary role in kuo-toan society is to fight to the death
to claim the throne when the archpriest dies. If a whip
displeases the archpriest, the archpriest can strip it of
its spellcasting ability, if not its life.
The archpriest's decrees are enforced by monitors,
devout kuo-toa that act as the archpriest's eyes and ears
Monitors are deadly hand-to-hand combatants, and
lesser kuo-toa live in fear of them.
Kuo-toa Gear. Many weapons of the kuo-toa
are designed to capture rather than kill. Nets are
common, though some carry pincer staffs (also called
mancatchers) designed to trap and immobilize foes.
Kuo-toa warriors also treat their shields with a sticky
goo that catches incoming weapons.
In general, kuo-toa don't like the weight of armor on
their slippery bodies and rely on their natural rubbery
hides for protection. However, they like to wear jewelry
made from scavenged bones, shells, pearls, gems, and
carapace fragments.
owN GODS .- T^
VERV 08F-N>TION
oF ,NS/VN>TV.
Kuo-toa
Medium humanoid (kuo-toa), neutral evil
Actions
Armor Class 13 (natural armor, shield)
Hit Points 18 (4d8)
Speed 30 ft, swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)     11 (+0)     10 (+0)      8 (-1)
Skills Perception +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Undercommon
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Amphibious. The kuo-toa can breathe air and water.
Otherworldly Perception. The kuo-toa can sense the presence
of any creature within 30 feet of it that is invisible or on the
Ethereal Plane. It can pinpoint such a creature that is moving.
Slippery. The kuo-toa has advantage on ability checks and
saving throws made to escape a grapple.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kuo-toa has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack': +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage, or
5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
Net. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 5/15 ft., one Large
or smaller creature. Hit: The target is restrained. A creature
can use its action to make a DC 10 Strength check to free itself
or another creature in a net, ending the effect on a success.
Dealing 5 slashing damage to the net (AC 10) frees the target
without harming it and destroys the net.
Reactions____________________________
Sticky Shield. When a creature misses the kuo-toa with a melee
weapon attack, the kuo-toa uses its sticky shield to catch
the weapon. The attacker must succeed on a DC 11 Strength
saving throw, or the weapon becomes stuck to the kuo-toa's
shield. If the weapon's wielder can't or won't let go of the
weapon, the wielder is grappled while the weapon is stuck.
While stuck, the weapon can't be used. A creature can pull
the weapon free by taking an action to make a DC 11 Strength
check and succeeding.

j'
199
,
____
Kuo-toa Archpriest
Medium bumanoid (kuo-toa), neutral evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 97 (13d8+39)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      14 (+2)      16 (+3)      13 (+1)     16 (+3)      14 (+2)
Skills Perception +9, Religion +6
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Undercommon
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Amphibious. The kuo-toa can breathe air and water.
Otherworldly Perception. The kuo-toa can sense the presence
of any creature within 30 feet of it that is invisible or on the
Ethereal Plane. It can pinpoint such a creature that is moving.
Slippery. The kuo-toa has advantage on ability checks and
saving throws made to escape a grapple.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kuo-toa has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Spellcasting. The kuo-toa is a lOth-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit
with spell attacks). The kuo-toa has the following cleric
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): guidance, sacred flame, thaumaturge
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, sanctuary, shield of faith
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, spiritual weapon
3rd level (3 slots): spirit guardians, tongues
4th level (3 slots): control water, divination
5th level (2 slots): mass cure wounds, scrying
Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The kuo-toa makes two melee attacks.
Scepter. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6+ 3) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (4d6)
lightning damage.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Kuo-toa Whip
Medium humahoid (kuo-toa), neutral evil
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX        CON          INT
14 (+2)      10 (+0)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)
Skills Perception +6, Religion +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Undercommon
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Amphibious. The kuo-toa can breathe air and water.
Otherworldly Perception. The kuo-toa can sense the presence
of any creature within 30 feet of it that is invisible or on the
Ethereal Plane. It can pinpoint such a creature that is moving.
Slippery. The kuo-toa has advantage on ability checks and
saving throws made to escape a grapple.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kuo-toa has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Spellcasting. The kuo-toa is a 2nd-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit
with spell attacks). The kuo-toa has the following cleric
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): sacred flame, thaumaturgy
1st level (3 slots): bane, shield of faith
Actions
Multiattack. The kuo-toa makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its pincer staff.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Pincer Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is
a Medium or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 14).
Until this grapple ends, the kuo-toa can't use its pincer staff on
another target.

300
\



<K£S/
Lamia
Ruined desert cities and the tombs of forgotten
monarchs make perfect lairs for the wicked lamias.
These decadent monsters take what has been
forgotten and make it the seat of their hedonistic rule,
surrounding themselves with sycophants. Lamias rely
otljackalweres to perform various tasks, sending them
across the wastes to capture slaves or steal treasures
from caravans, encampments, or villages, concealed by
the lamia's magic as they attack.
A lamia has a beautiful humanoid upper body that
merges into a powerful four-legged leonine form. Its
vicious black claws speak to its predatory nature, as
does its hunger for torture and humanoid flesh.
Tyrants of Pleasure. Lamias adorn their crumbling
havens with finery stolen from passing caravans, then
use magic to further accentuate their lairs, masking
decay with illusion. A lair's breathtaking gardens, finely
decorated apartments, and numerous slaves seem at
odds with its remoteness and state of ruin.
Using its intoxicating touch, a lamia weakens the
minds of its enemies, making them more susceptible .
to its enchantment spells and turning them into its
slaves. Those it beguiles with geas spells are pitted
against each other in elaborate contests for the
lamia's amusement.
Vain Predators. Always anxious to gain more wealth
and slaves, a lamia uses a pool of water or a mirror
in conjunction with a scrying spell to view its domain.
A lamia uses this power to watch over trade routes
and nearby settlements, or to seek out objects and
creatures it fancies.
Lamias are particularly fond of seeking out
adventurers with pure hearts to seduce and corrupt
to evil, savoring the destruction of their virtue. They
use their magic to lure potential victims to their lairs,
relying on illusion and their thralls to capture hapless
foes. Lamias prize beauty and strength above all else,
however. Any prisoner that falls short of their esteem
becomes the main course in a horrible feast, or is set
free to die while wandering the wastes.
As long as they have slaves to face their enemies,
lamias fight from the fringes, beguiling foes with magic
if they can. A lamia pressed into melee never stays there
for long, shredding flesh with claw and dagger before
springing away to safety.
Minions of Graz'zt. The demon lord Graz'zt creates
lamias from his mortal servants, granting them
immortality in return for monstrous power and an oath
of fealty. Graz'zt sometimes tasks lamias with guarding
locations important to him, but lamias in his service
remain free to spread their evil as they $'§£ fit.
Lamia
\a(ge tnonsflrbshy, chaotic evil
AfiTidr Clws13,(natural armor)
'HitPqint$,97'(T3cno + 2e)
SpeedI 30 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX         CON
13 (+1)      15 (+2)
INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)     15 (+2)      16 (+3)
Skills Deception +7, Insight +4, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Common
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
^————
Innate Spellcasting. The lamia's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 13). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring no material components.
At will: disguise self (any humanoid form), major image
3/day each: charm person, mirror image, scrying, suggestion
1/day: geas
Actions
Multiattack. The lamia makes two attacks: one with its claws
and one with its dagger or Intoxicating Touch.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2dl0 + 3) slashing damage.
Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage.
Intoxicating Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one creature. Hit: The target is magically cursed for 1 hour.
Until the curse ends, the target has disadvantage on Wisdom
saving throws and all ability checks.
«oi
^ LlGH
I Medium Unaead, any evil alignment
Armor Class 17 (natural armor'
Hit Points 135 (18d8 +54)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
n (+0)
DEX
16 (+3)
CON
16 (+3)
INT          WIS
20 (+5)     14 (+2)
i
Saving Throws Con +10, Int +12, Wis +9
Skills Arcana +18, History +12, Insight +9, Perception +9
Damage Resistances cold, lightning, necrotic
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Common plus up to five other languages
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP)
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the lich fails a saving throw, it
can choose to succeed instead.
Rejuvenation. If it has a phylactery, a destroyed lich gains
a new body in IdlO days, regaining all its hit points and
becoming active again. The new body appears within 5 feet of
the phylactery.
;V>:': i
I   Spellcasting. The lich is an 18th-level spellcaster. Its
I spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 20, +12
to hit with spell attacks). The lich has the following wizard
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mage hand, prestidigitation, ray offrost
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, magic missile, shield,
thunderwave
2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, invisibility, Melfs acid arrow,
mirror image
3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, counterspell, dispel
magic, fireball
4th level (3 slots): blight, dimension door
5th level (3 slots): cloudkill, scrying
6th level (1 slot): disintegrate, globe of invulnerability
7th level (1 slot): finger of death, plane shift
8th level (1 slot): dominate monster, power word stun
9th level (1 slot): power word kill
Turn Resistance. The lich has advantage on saving throws
against any effect that turns undead.
Actions
Paralyzing Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) cold damage. The target must succeed
on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Legendary Actions____________________
The lich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
lich regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Cantrip. The lich casts a cantrip.
Paralyzing Touch (Costs 2 Actions). The lich uses its
Paralyzing Touch.
Frightening Gaze (Costs 2 Actions). The lich fixes its gaze on
one creature it can see within 10 feet of it. The target must
succeed on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw against this magic
or become frightened for 1 minute. The frightened target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success. If a target's saving throw is
successful or the effect ends for it, the target is immune to
the lich's gaze for the next 24 hours.
Disrupt Life (Costs 3 Actions). Each living creature within 20
feet of the lich must make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw
against this magic, taking 21 (6d6) necrotic damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
%t>%
Mm:




LfCH
Liches are the remains of great wizards who embrace
undeath as a means of preserving themselves. They
further their own power at any cost, having no interest
in the affairs of the living except where those affairs
interfere with their own. Scheming and insane, they
hunger for long-forgotten knowledge and the most
terrible secrets. Because the shadow of death doesn't
hang over them, they can conceive plans that take years,
decades, or centuries to come to fruition.
A lich is a gaunt and skeletal humanoid with
withered flesh stretched tight across its bones. Its eyes
succumbed to decay long ago, but points of light burn
in its empty sockets. It is often garbed in the moldering
remains of fine clothing and jewelry worn and dulled by
the passage of time.
Secrets of Undeath. No wizard takes up the path to
lichdom on a whim, and the process of becoming a lich
is a well-guarded secret. Wizards that seek lichdom
must make bargains with fiends, evil gods, or other foul
entities. Many turn to Orcus, Demon Prince of Undeath,
whose power has created countless liches. However,
those that control the power of lichdom always demand
fealty and service for their knowledge.
A lich is created by an arcane ritual that traps the
wizard's soul within a phylactery. Doing so binds the
soul to the mortal world, preventing it from traveling
to the Outer Planes after death. A phylactery is
traditionally an aniulet in the shape of a small box, but
it can take the form of any item possessing an interior
space into which arcane sigils of naming, binding,
immortality, and dark magic are scribed in silver.
With its phylactery prepared, the future lich drinks a
potion of transformation—a vile concoction of poison
mixed with the blood of a sentient creature whose
soul is sacrificed to the phylactery. The wizard falls
dead, then rises as a lich as its soul is drawn into the
phylactery, where it forever remains.
Soul Sacrifices. A lich must periodically feed souls to
its phylactery to sustain the magic preserving its body
and consciousness. It does this using the imprisonment
spell. Instead of choosing one of the normal options
of the spell, the lich uses the spell to magically trap
the target's body and soul inside its phylactery. The
phylactery must be on the same plane as the lich for
the spell to work. A lich's phylactery can hold only
one creature at a time, and a dispel magic cast as a
9th-level spell upon the phylactery releases any creature
imprisoned within it. A creature imprisoned in the
phylactery for 24 hours is consumed and destroyed
utterly, whereupon nothing short of divine intervention
can restore it to life.
A lich that fails or forgets to maintain its body with
sacrificed souls begins to physically fall apart, and
might eventually become a demilich.
Death and Restoration. When a lich's body is
broken by accident or assault, the will and mind of
the lich drains from it, leaving only a lifeless corpse
behind. Within days, a new body reforms next to the
lich's phylactery, coalescing out of glowing smoke that
issues from the device. Because the destruction of
its phylactery means the possibility of eternal death,
a lich usually keeps its phylactery in a hidden, well-
guarded location.
Destroying a lich's phylactery is no easy task and
often requires a special ritual, item, or weapon. Every
phylactery is unique, and discovering the key to %fg
destruction can be a quest in and of itself.
Lonely Existence. From time to time, a lich might be
stirred from its single-minded pursuit of power td-jjske
an interest in the world around it, most often^when some
great event reminds it of the life it once led. It otherwise
lives in isolation, engaging only with those creatUrgg
whose service helps secure its lair.
Few liches call themselves by their former names, ■ "
instead adopting monikers such as the Black Ha^'d;6r •
the Forgotten King.
Magic Collectors. Liches collect spells and magic
items. In addition to its spell repertoire, a lich has ready
access to potions, scrolls, libraries of spellbooks, one
or more wands, and perhaps a staff or two. It has no
qualms about putting these treasures to use whenever
its lair comes under attack.
Undead Nature. A lich doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
A Lich's Lair____________________
A lich often haunts the abode it favored in life, such as
a lonely tower, a haunted ruin, or an academy of black
magic. Alternatively, some liches construct secret tombs
filled with powerful guardians and traps.
Everything about a lich's lair reflects its keen mind
and wicked cunning, including the magic and mundane
traps that secure it. Undead, constructs, and bound
demons lurk in shadowy recesses, emerging to destroy
those who dare to disturb the lich's work.
A lich encountered in its lair has a challenge rating of
22 (41,000 XP).
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the lich
can take a lair action to cause one of the following
magical effects; the lich can't use the same effect two
rounds in a row:
•  The lich rolls a d8 and regains a spell slot of that level
or lower. If it has no spent spell slots of that level or
lower, nothing happens.
•  The lich targets one creature it can see within 30 feet
of it. A crackling cord of negative energy tethers the
lich to the target. Whenever the lich takes damage,
the target must make a DC 18 Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, the lich takes half the damage
(rounded down), and the target takes the remaining
damage. This tether lasts until initiative count 20 on
the next round or until the lich or the target is no lon-
ger in the lich's lair.
•  The lich calls forth the spirits of creatures that died in
its lair. These apparitions materialize and attack one
creature that the lich can see within 60 feet of it. The
target must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution saving
throw, taking 52 (15d6) necrotic damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a success. The appa-
ritions then disappear.
203
Lizardfolk
^
Lizardfolk are primitive reptilian humanoids that lurk in
the swamps and jungles of the world. Their hut villages
thrive in forbidding grottos, half-sunken ruins, and
watery caverns.
Territorial Xenophobes. Lizardfolk deal and trade
with other races only rarely. Fiercely territorial, they
use camouflaged scouts to guard the perimeter of their
domain. When unwelcome visitors are detected, a tribe
sends a hunting band to harass or drive the trespassers
off, or tricks them into blundering into the lairs of
crocodiles and other dangerous creatures.
Lizardfolk have no notion of traditional morality, and
they find the concepts of good and evil utterly alien.
Truly neutral creatures, they kill when it is expedient
and do whatever it takes to survive.
Lizardfolk rarely stray beyond their claimed hunting
grounds. Any creature that enters their territory is fair
game to be stalked, killed, and devoured. They make no
distinction between humanoids, beasts, and monsters.
Similarly, lizardfolk don't like reaching too far beyond
their borders, where they could easily become the
hunted instead of the hunters.
Occasions might arise when lizardfolk
will form alliances with their neighbors.
These lizardfolk usually learn firsthand
that humans, dwarves, halflings, and
elves can sometimes prove helpful or
trustworthy. Once lizardfolk forge ties with
outsiders, they are steadfast and fierce allies
Great Feasts and Sacrifices. Lizardfolk are
omnivorous, but they have a taste for humanoid
flesh. Prisoners are often taken back to their camps
"to become the centerpieces of great feasts and rites
involving dancing, storytelling, and ritual combat.
'^Victims are either cooked and eaten by the tribe, or are
sacrificed to Semuanya, the lizardfolk god.
Canny Crafters. Though they aren't skilled artisans,
lizardfolk craft tools and ornamental jewelry out of the
bones of their kills, and they use the hides and shells of
dead monsters to create shields.
Lizardfolk Leaders. Lizardfolk respect and fear
magic with a religious awe. Lizardfolk shamans lead
their tribes, overseeing rites and ceremonies performed
to honor Semuanya. From time to time, however, a
lizardfolk tribe produces a powerful figure touched not
by Semuanya but by Sess'inek—a reptilian demon lord
Who seeks to corrupt and control the lizardfolk.
Lizardfolk born in Sess'inek's image are larger and
more cunning than other lizardfolk, and are thoroughly
evil. These lizard kings and queens dominate lizardfolk
tribes, usurping a shaman's authority and inspiring
uncharacteristic aggression among their subjects.
Dragon Worshipers. Lizardfolk speak Draconic,
which they are thought to have learned from dragons in
ancient times. A tribe that wanders into the territory of a
dragon will offer it tribute to win its favor. An evil dragon
might exploit lizardfolk for its own vile ends, turning
them into raiders and plunderers.
Lizardfolk
Medium humanoid (lizardfolk), neutral
Armor Class 1$ (natural armor, shield)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)       7 (-2)       12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4, Survival +5
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Draconic
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Hold Breath. The lizardfolk can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
Actions
Multiattack. The lizardfolk makes two melee attacks, each one
I with a different weapon.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Heavy Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Spiked Shield. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
"°~-^   L-                     .-..te.'-f-.i-iAfciia
aanj**q!n«fe^wiiTr«!aym
254
rZARliFOLK
Y
J
Lizardfolk Shaman
Medium humanoid (lizardfolk), neutral
Armor Class 13, (natural armor)
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)      10 (+0)     15 (+2)       8 (-1)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4, Survival +6
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Hold Breath. The lizardfolk can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
Spellcasting (Lizardfolk Form Only). The lizardfolk is a 5th-level
spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC
12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). The lizardfolk has the following
druid spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, produce flame, thorn whip
1st Level (4 slots): entangle, fog cloud
2nd Level (3 slots): heat metal, spike growth
3rd Level (2 slots): conjure animals (reptiles only), plant growth
1 Actions
Multiattack (Lizardfolk Form Only). The lizardfolk makes two
attacks: one with its bite and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage, or 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing
damage in crocodile form. If the lizardfolk is in crocodile form
and the target is a Large or smaller creature, the target is
grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple ends, the target is
restrained, and the lizardfolk can't bite another target. If the
lizardfolk reverts to its true form, the grapple ends.
Claws (Lizardfolk Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
Change Shape (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The
lizardfolk magically polymorphs into a crocodile, remaining
in that form for up to 1 hour. It can revert to its true form as
a bonus action. Its statistics, other than its size, are the same
in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't
transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
'In all my dealings with the
liiarofolk, i wa1 never able to
tell what they were thinking.
Their reptilian eyes belied no
hint of their intentions. i gave
them supplies. they gave me
the willies."
-A merchant's ACCOUNT OF HIS
experience with the
lizardfolk tribes of the
Lizard Marsh
Lizard King/Queen
Medium humanoid (lizardfolk), chaotic evil
—i^^—.—.
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 78 (12d8+24)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)       12 (+1)      15 (+2)      11 (+0)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5, Survival +4
Condition Immunities frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, Draconic
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Hold Breath. The lizardfolk can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
Skewer. Once per turn, when the lizardfolk makes a melee
attack with its trident and hits, the target takes an extra 10
(3d6) damage, and the lizardfolk gains temporary hit points
equal to the extra damage dealt.
Actions
Multiattack. The lizardfolk makes two attacks: one with its
bite and one with its claws or trident or two melee attacks with
its trident.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft, one target.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) slashing damage.
Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage, or
7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
•   ...:. „i
205.
Ly6^n^hropes
One of the most ancient and feared of all curses,
lycanthropy can transform the most civilized humanoid
into a ravening beast. In its natural humanoid form, a
creature cursed by lycanthropy appears as its normal
self. Over time, however, many lycanthropes acquire
_ features suggestive of their animal form. In that animal
form, a lycanthrope resembles a powerful version of
a normal animal. On close inspection, its eyes show a
faint spark of unnatural intelligence and might glow red
in the dark.
Evil lycanthropes hide among normal folk, emerging
in animal form at night to spread terror and bloodshed,
especially under a full moon. Good lycanthropes are
reclusive and uncomfortable around other civilized
creatures, often living alone in wilderness areas far
from villages and towns.
Curse of Lycanthropy. A humanoid creature can
be afflicted with the curse of lycanthropy after being
wounded by a lycanthrope, or if one or both of its
parents are lycanthropes. A remove curse spell can rid
an afflicted lycanthrope of the curse, but a natural born
lycanthrope can be freed of the curse only with a wish.
A lycanthrope can either resist its curse or embrace
it. By resisting the curse, a lycanthrope retains its
normal alignment and personality while in humanoid
form. It lives its life as it always has, burying deep the
bestial urges raging inside it. However, when the full
moon rises, the curse becomes too strong to resist,
transforming the individual into its beast form—or
into a horrible hybrid form that combines animal and
humanoid traits. When the moon wanes, the beast
within can be controlled once again. Especially if the
cursed creature is unaware of its condition, it might not
remember the events of its transformation, though those
memories often haunt a lycanthrope as bloody dreams.
Some individuals see little point in fighting the curse
and accept what they are. With time and experience,
they learn to master their shapechanging ability and
can assume beast form or hybrid form at will. Most
lycanthropes that embrace their bestial natures
succumb to bloodlust, becoming evil, opportunistic
creatures that prey on the weak.
Werebear_______________________
Werebears are powerful lycanthropes with the ability to
temper their monstrous natures and reject their violent
impulses. In humanoid form, they are large, muscular,
and covered in hair matching the color of their ursine
form's fur. A werebear is a loner by nature, fearing what
might happen to innocent creatures around it when its
bestial nature takes over.
A__________________________________________k.
Variant: Nonhuman Lycanthropes
The statistics presented in this section assume a base
creature of human. However, you can also use the statistics
to represent nonhuman lycanthropes, adding verisimilitude
by allowing a nonhuman lycanthrope to retain one or more of
its humanoid racial traits. For example, an elf werewolf might
have the Fey Ancestry trait.
'*•"                        mmmmmmmmmmmmmm



WKen a werebear'transforms, it grows to enormous
size, lashing out with weapons or claws. It fights with
the ferocity of a bear, though even in its bestial forms,
it avoids biting so as to not pass on its curse. Typically,
a werebear passes on its lycanthropy only to chosen
companions or apprentices, spending the time that
follows helping the new lycanthrope accept the curse in
order to control it.
Solitary creatures, werebears act as wardens over
their territory, protecting flora and fauna alike from
humanoid or monstrous intrusion. Though most
werebears are of good alignment, some are every bit as
evil as other lycanthropes.
Wereboar________________________
Wereboars are ill-tempered and vulgar brutes. As
humanoids, they are stocky and muscular, with short,
stiff hair. In their humanoid and hybrid forms, they use
heavy weapons, while in hybrid or animal form, they
gain a devastating goring attack through which their
curse is spread. A wereboar infects other creatures
indiscriminately, relishing the fact that the more its
victims resist the curse, the more savage and bestial
they become.
Wereboars live in small family groups in remote forest
areas, building ramshackle huts or dwelling in caves.
They are suspicious of strangers but sometimes ally
themselves with ores.
Wererats are cunning lycanthropes with sly, avaricious
personalities. They are wiry and twitchy in humanoid
form, with thin hair and darting eyes. In their humanoid
and hybrid forms, wererats prefer light weapons and use
ambush tactics rather than fighting as a pack. Although
a wererat can deliver a nasty bite in its rat form, it favors
that form for stealthy infiltration and escape rather
than combat.
A wererat clan operates much like a thieves' guild,
with wererats transmitting their curse only to creatures
they want to induct into the clan. Wererats that are
accidentally cursed or break loose from the clan's
control are quickly hunted down and killed.
Wererat clans are found throughout urban civilization,
often dwelling in cellars and catacombs. These
creatures are common in the sewers beneath major
cities, viewing those subterranean areas as their
hunting grounds. Rats and giant rats are commonly
found living among wererats.
Weretiger
Weretigers are ferocious hunters and warriors with
a haughty and fastidious nature. Lithe and sleekly
muscular in humanoid form, they are taller than
average and meticulously groomed. Weretigers grow to
enormous size in animal and hybrid form, but they fight
in their more refined humanoid form when they can.
They don't like to pass on their curse, because every
new weretiger means competition for territory and prey.
Weretigers live in jungles on the fringes of humanoid
civilization, traveling to isolated settlements to trade or
revel. They live and hunt alone or in small family groups.
Werewolf
-----------------------------------------, ^,,t„,.  „,
A werewolf is a savage predator. In its humanoiji ,fermv
a werewolf has heightened senses, a fiery temper, and
a tendency to eat rare meat. Its wolf form is a fearsome
predator, but its hybrid form is more terrifying by'fat—a
furred and well-muscled humanoid body topped by a
ravening wolf's head. A werewolf can wield weapons ifl,,
hybrid form, though it prefers to tear foes, apart \with its
powerful claws and bite.
Most werewolves flee civilized lands not long'atter
becoming afflicted. Those that reject the curse feajr.
what will happen if they remain among their friends and
family. Those that embrace the curse fear discovery and
the consequences of their murderous.acts. In the wild,
werewolves form packs that also include wolves and
dire wolves.
A                                                                 ,                  k
Player Characters as Lycanthropes
A character who becomes a lycanthrope retains his or
her statistics except as specified by lycanthrope type. The
character gains the lycanthrope's speeds in nonhumanoid
form, damage immunities, traits, and actions that don't
involve equipment. The character is proficient with the
lycanthrope's natural attacks, such as its bite or claws, which
deal damage as shown in the lycanthrope's statistics. The
character can't speak while in animal form.
A humanoid hit by an attack that carries the curse
of lycanthropy must succeed on a Constitution saving
throw (DC 8 + the lycanthrope's proficiency bonus + the
lycanthrope's Constitution modifier) or be cursed. If the
character embraces the curse, his or her alignment becomes
the one defined for the lycanthrope. The DM is free to decide
that a change in alignment places the character under DM
control until the curse of lycanthropy is removed.
The following information applies to specific lycanthropes.
Werebear. The character gains a Strength of 19 if his or her
score isn't already higher, and a +1 bonus to AC while in bear
or hybrid form (from natural armor). Attack and damage rolls
for the natural weapons are based on Strength.
Wereboar. The character gains a Strength of 17 if his or
her score isn't already higher, and a +1 bonus to AC while
in boar or hybrid form (from natural armor). Attack and
damage rolls for the tusks are based on Strength. For the
Charge trait, the DC is 8 + the character's proficiency bonus +
Strength modifier.
Wererat. The character gains a Dexterity of 15 if his or
her score isn't already higher. Attack and damage rolls for
the bite are based on whichever is higher of the character's
Strength and Dexterity.
Weretiger. The character gains a Strength of 17 if his or
her score isn't already higher. Attack and damage rolls for
the natural weapons are based on Strength. For the Pounce
trait, the DC is 8 + the character's proficiency bonus +
Strength modifier.
Werewolf. The character gains a Strength of 15 if his or her
score isn't already higher, and a +1 bonus to AC while in wolf
or hybrid form (from natural armor). Attack and damage rolls
for the natural weapons are based on Strength.
■**=£ ■~is0s: if&S
207=

Werebear
Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), neutral good
Armor Class 10 in humanoid form, 11 (natural armor) in bear
and hybrid form
Hit Points 135 (18d8 +54)
Speed 30 ft. (40 ft., climb 30 ft. in bear or hybrid form)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
|    19 (+4)      10 (+0)      17 (+3)      11 (+0)     12 (+1)      12 (+1)
Skills Perception +7
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Senses passive Perception 17
I Languages Common (can't speak in bear form)
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
' Shapechanger. The werebear can use its action to polymorph
into a Large bear-humanoid hybrid or into a Large bear, or back
into its true form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than
Its size and AC. are thesame ir\ each^fo'rni- Any equipment it is
wearing or carrying isrVt transformed. It reverts to its true forrti
if it dies.
Keen Smell. The werebearhas advantage on Wisdorrf
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions___________________________I
Multiattack. In bear form, the werebear makes two claw
attacks. In humanoid form, it makes two greataxe attacks. In
hybrid form, it can attack like a bear or a humanoid.
Bite (Bear or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7
to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing
damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a
DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with werebear
lycanthropy.
Claw (Bear or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Creataxe (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (ldl2 + 4)
slashing damage.
s?p8
s
=SS
-,;,,
Were^Oar
Medium hutnanpid (human, shapechanger), neutral evil
Armor Class 10 in humanoid form, 11 (natural armor) in boar
or hybrid form
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24)
Speed 30 ft. (40 ft. in boar form)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      10 (+0)     15 (+2)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)      8 (-1)
I Skills Perception +2
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Common (can't speak in boar form)
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Shapechanger. The wereboar can use its action to polymorph
into a boar-humanoid hybrid or into a boar, or back into its true
form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its AC, are
the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying    >
< isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
j Charge (Boar or Hybrid Form Only). If the wereboar moves
I at least 15 feet straight toward a target and then hits it with
' its tusks on the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6)
slashing damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on
I a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the
wereboar takes 14 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit
I points, it is reduced to 1 hit point instead.
Actions
Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The wereboar
] makes two attacks, only one of which can be with its tusks.
Maul (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3)
I bludgeoning damage.
j Tusks (Boar or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack:
] +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing
J damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a
DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with wereboar
lycanthropy.
Wererat
Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), lawful evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
10 (+0)
DEX
15 (+2)
CON
12 (+1)
INT          WIS
11 (+0)     10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Senses darkvision 60 ft. (rat form only), passive Perception 12
Languages Common (can't speak in rat form)
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Shapechanger. The wererat can use its action to polymorph
into a rat-humanoid hybrid or into a giant rat, or back into its
true form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its
size, are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or
carrying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
Keen Smell. The wererat has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The wererat
makes two attacks, only one of which can be a bite.
Bite (Rat or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack:
+4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing
damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a
DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with wererat
lycanthropy.
Shortsword (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2)
piercing damage.
Hand Crossbow (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Ranged
Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5
(ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
209
J
IWeretiger
Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), neutral
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 120 (16d8 + 48)
Speed 30 ft. (40 ft. in tiger form)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)       15 (+2)      16 (+3)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)      11 (+0)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Common (can't speak in tiger form)
•challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Shapechanger. The weretiger can use its action to polymorph
| into a tiger-humanoid hybrid or into a tiger, or back into its true
1 form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its size, are
; the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying
I isn't transformed, it reverts to its true form if it dies.
J Keen Hearing and Smell. The weretiger has advantage on
[ Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Pounce (Tiger or Hybrid Form Only). |f thje Weretiger moves at
least 15 feet straight toward a creature arid, then hits it with a
claw attack on thesametilrri, that.target must succeed on a
DC 14 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target
is prone, the weretiger can make one bite attack against it as a
bonus action.
Actions
Multiattack (Humanoidor Hybrid Form Only). In humanoid
form, the weretiger makes two scimitar attacks or two longbow
attacks. In hybrid form, it can attack like a humanoid or make
two claw attacks.
Bite (Tiger or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack:
+5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (ldl0+ 3) piercing
damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a
DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with weretiger
lycanthropy.
Claw (Tiger or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage.
Scimitar (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3)
slashing damage.
Longbow (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Ranged Weapon
Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2)
piercing damage.
?lo

I
Sfj
'


\
UN00THEcUI,seAP7WH0CAN
I'F°«0NEH^AFrL,CTI^THeM.
-c.h?e:;;0hstno'-^t1n
-th^wf.elfdruid
Werewolf
Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), chaotic 'evil
Armor Class 11 in humanoid form, 12 (natural armor) in wolf or
hybrid form
Hit Points 58 (9d8 +18)
Speed 30 ft. (40 ft. in wolf form)
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)       13 (+1)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)      10 (+0)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Common (can't speak in wolf form)
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Shapechanger. The werewolf can use its action to polymorph
into a wolf-humanoid hybrid or into a wolf, or back into its true
form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its AC, are
the sanle in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying
i$n't transformed. It,reverts to its true form if it dies.
Keen Hearing and Smell. The werewolf h'as advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Actions
Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The werewolf
makes two attacks: one with its bite and one with its
claws or spear.
Bite (Wolf or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack:
+4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing
damage. Ifthe target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a
DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with werewolf
lycanthropy.
Claws (Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Spear (Humanoid Form Only). Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack:
+4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (ld6
+ 2) piercing damage, or 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage if used
with two hands to make a melee attack.
-^n
211


M.V--
A grinning, mischievous magmin resembles a stumpy
humanoid sculpted from a black shell of magma. Even
I   when it isn't ablaze and radiating heat like a bonfire,
* small jets of flame erupt from its porous skin.
Summoned Pyromaniacs. Magmins are fire
elemental spirits bound into physical forms by magic,
and they appear in the Material Plane only when
summoned. They view flammable objects as kindling
for a grand conflagration, and only the magical control
exerted by their summoners keeps them from setting
'" everything they touch ablaze. Their propensity for fire
"Vand havoc makes them ideal for spreading chaos and
'' destruction. A mob of magmins summoned inside a
castle can reduce it to a burning shell within minutes.
Fiery Destruction. Although its flame is potent, the
magmin's hard magma shell prevents it from instantly
igniting everything it comes into contact with. However,
!• like the fires inside them, magmins are capricious and
,   unpredictable. Moreover, as simple elemental creations,
b  they are oblivious to the harm their native element
causes creatures of the Material Plane.
If it has the opportunity while in service to its master,
a magmin seeks out areas of great heat, such as forest
fires or the bubbling magma of an active volcano. At
other times, a magmin compulsively looses fire from its
fingertips, delighting in setting objects ablaze.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
7 (-2)       15 (+2)      12 (+1)       8 (-1)      11 (+0)      10 (+0)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
LanguagesIgnan
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Death Burst. When the magmin dies, it explodes in a burst of
fire and magma. Each creature within 10 feet of it must make
a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) fire damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Flammable objects that aren't being worn or carried in that
area are ignited.
Ignited Illumination. As a bonus action, the magmin can set
itself ablaze or extinguish its flames. While ablaze, the magmin
sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius and dim light for an
additional 10 feet.
Actions
Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
1 target. Hit: 7 (2d6) fire damage. If the target is a creature or a
I flammable object, it ignites. Until a creature takes an action to   |
I douse the fire, the creature takes 3 (ld6) fire damage at the end
I of each of its turns.
1_____                                ______________________
—-—...-■        -    --■'.-—■ --.—- -         .-■■-..-         i

* $•■ '"fid


(«r^    ^'{;.BS
.■^>^«i^-
.'   M-    ■■■1^-g,,-        ■               —^
Manticore
Large monstrosity, lawful evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8dl0 + 24)
/ Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      16 (+3)      17 (+3)       7 (-2)       12 (+1)       8 (-1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Tail Spike Regrowth. The manticore has twenty-four tail spikes.
Used spikes regrow when the manticore finishes a long rest.
Actions
i Multiattnck. The manticore makes three attacks: one with its
bite and two with its claws or three with its tail spikes.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.
j Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
j Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
3 Tail Spike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 100/200ft.,
j one target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.
L*».,.fc.^i~1.^ ^j^j
:-J^ '"»■"»* ■"»" --""
^M^°«EsL°vvM£TrTE
WHY. CM TRIP* THROUGH TH«
t.kic   1 M-WAYS TRAVEL
MOUNTAIN. 1 AU
W1TH HUMAN GUAROS
_MARTHOkVl°ARP-.
OVMRF COP** "«CHA*T
Manticore
A monster in every sense of the word, a manticore has
a vaguely humanoid head, the body of a lion, and the
wings of a dragon. A bristling mane stretches down
the creature's back, and its long tail ends in a cluster of
deadly spikes that can impale prey at impressive range.
Evil Predators. Manticores are fierce killers that hunt
far and wide for prey. They work together to take down
particularly large or dangerous creatures, sharing the
meal once a kill is made. A manticore begins its attack
with a volley of tail spikes, then lands and uses its claws
and bite. When outdoors and outnumbered, it uses its
wings to stay aloft, attacking from a distance until its
spikes are depleted.
A manticore isn't particularly bright, but it possesses
a malevolent nature and the ability to converse. In the
course of attacking, it denigrates its foes and offers to
kill them swiftly if they beg for their lives. If a manticore
sees an advantage to be gained by sparing a creature's
life, it does so, asking for a tribute or sacrifice equal to
its loss of food.
Monstrous Relationships. Manticores serve wicked
masters that treat them well and provide regular prey. A
manticore might provide aerial support for an ore horde
or a hobgoblin army. Another could serve as a hunting
companion for a hill giant chief, or guard the entrance to
a lamia's lair.
The manticores' greatest territorial rivals include
chimeras, griffons, perytons, and wyverns. Manticores
hunting as a pack often have the advantage of greater
numbers. In addition to these creatures, manticores fear
dragons and avoid them.
ai3
w®
\^^p
Medusa
As deadly as they are ravishing, the serpent-haired
medusas suffer an immortal curse brought on by their
vanity. They lurk in quiet exile among the tumbled
, ruins of their former lives, surrounded by the petrified
remains of past admirers and would-be heroes.
Immortal Splendor. Men and women who desire
eternal youth, beauty, and adoration might pray to
malicious gods, beg dragons for ancient magic, or seek
out powerful archmages to fulfill their wishes. Others
make sacrifices to demon lords or archdevils, offering
all in exchange for this gift, oblivious to the curse that
accompanies it. Those who strike such bargains gain
physical beauty, restored youth, immortality, and the
adoration of all who behold them, granting them the
influence and power they so desire. However, after years
of the living like a demigod among mortals, the price for
their vanity and hubris is exacted, and they are forever
transformed into medusas. A medusa's hair turns into a
(Test of venomous serpents, and all who gaze upon the
medusa are petrified, becoming stone monuments to
its corruption.
■*-.*
^
"ii Ft' *>* V
Medusa Lairs. Medusas live forever in seclusion,
alienated from the world around them by their
monstrous form and caprice. Their homes gradually fall
into disrepair until they are little more than shadowy
ruins covered with thorns and creepers, riddled with
obstructions and hiding places. Foolhardy looters
and adventurers who enter are often unaware of the
medusa's presence until the creature is among them.
A medusa is subject to its own curse. By looking vainly
on its reflection, it turns to stone as surely as any living
mortal. As a result, a medusa destroys or removes any
mirrors or reflective surfaces in its lair.
Medusa
Medium monstrosity, lawful evil
WW—
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (17d8 +51)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
10 (+0)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      13 (+1)      15 (+2)
Skills Deception +5, Insight+4, Perception +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Common
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Petrifying Gaze. When a creature that can see the medusa's
eyes starts its turn within 30 feet of the medusa, the medusa
can force it to make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw if
the medusa isn't incapacitated and can see the creature. If
the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the creature is instantly
petrified. Otherwise, a creature that fails the save begins to
turn to stone and is restrained. The restrained creature must
repeat the saving throw at the end of its next turn, becoming
petrified on a failure or ending the effect on a success. The
petrification lasts until the creature is freed by the greater
restoration spell or other magic.
Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the
saving throw at the start of its turn. If the creature does so, it
can't see the medusa until the start of its next turn, when it can
avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at the medusa in the
meantime, it must immediately make the save.
If the medusa sees itself reflected on a polished surface
within 30 feet of it and in an area of bright light, the medusa is,
due to its curse, affected by its own gaze.
Actions
Multiattack. The medusa makes either three melee attacks—
one with its snake hair and two with its shortsword—or two
ranged attacks with its longbow.
Snake Hair. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6)
poison damage.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 150/600
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6)
poison damage.
--"-—fMTW  lilllillili   |.
■>-           -------- -
214
Mephits
Mephits are capricious, imp-like creatures native to the
elemental planes. They come in six varieties, each one
representing the mixture of two elements.
Ageless tricksters, mephits gather in large numbers^
on the Elemental Planes and in the Elemental Chaos.   ,
They also find their way to the Material Plane, where 'V
they prefer to dwell in places where their base elements'
are abundant. For example, a magma mephit is
composed of earth and fire, and it favors volcanic lairs,
while an ice mephit, which is composed of air and water,
favors frigid locales.
Elemental Nature. A mephit doesn't require food,
drink, or sleep.
EJtJST Mephit
—±—i i        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Composed of earth and air, dust mephits are drawn to
catacombs and find death morbidly fascinating.
lc£ Mephit*
Comprising frigid air and water, ice mephits are aloof
and cold, surpassing all other mephits in pitiless cruelty.
Dust Mephit
Small elemental, neutral evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 17 (5d6)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
5 (-3)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
10 (+0)
INT
9(-l)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Auran, Terran
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
WIS          CHA
11 (+0)     10 (+0)
Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst of
dust. Each creature within 5 feet of it must then succeed on a
DC 10 Constitution saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute.
: A blinded creature can repeat the saving throw on each of its
I turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
' Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast sleep,
' requiring no material components. Its innate spellcasting
/ ability is Charisma.
, Actions
Clou's. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
i creature. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
j
Blinding Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot
cone of blinding dust. Each creature in that area must succeed
on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute.
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
ft»  u ^ !^»;t.!.rM-jj...'i».i,i>.j^«*^Ai«-".^r^ibWE3saa
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +3
Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning, fire
Damage Immunities cold, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Aquan, Auran
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst of
jagged ice. Each creature within 5 feet of it must make a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw, taking 4 (ld8) slashing damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
False Appearance. While the mephit remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from an ordinary shard of ice.
Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast
fog cloud, requiring no material components. Its innate
spellcasting ability is Charisma.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) slashing damage plus 2 (ld4) cold damage.
Frost Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone
of cold air. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw, taking 5 (2d4) cold damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
215
Magma Mephit
Composed of earth and fire,
magma mephits glow a dull
red color as they perspire beads
of molten lava. They are slow to
comprehend the meaning of others'
words and actions.
Mud Mephit
E=
^■-'  "'*■■'             I'-uwar-
MagmA Mephit
Small elemental, neutral evil
Mud mephits are slow, unctuous creatures of earth
and water. They drone their complaints to all who will
listen, and beg incessantly for attention and treasure.
..ia^ ■-»■»£,„                .■AgHMaffiH
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
Mud Mephit
Small elemental, neutral evil •
STR
8(-l)
DEX         CON
12 (+1)      12 (+1)
INT
7 (-2)
WIS          CHA
10 (+0)     10 (+0)
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 27 (6d6 + 6)
Speed 20 ft., fly 20 ft,, swim 20 ft.
Skills Stealth +3
I Damage Vulnerabilities cold
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Ignan, Terran
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst
of lava. Each creature within 5 feet of it must make a DC 11
Dexterity saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) fire damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
False Appearance. While the mephit remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from an ordinary mound of magma.
Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast heat
metal (spell save DC 10), requiring no material components.
Its innate spellcasting ability is Charisma.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) slashing damage plus 2 (ld4) fire damage.
Fire Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone
of fire. Each creature in that area must make a DC 11 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
STR
8(-l)
DEX
12 (+1)
CON
12 (+1)
INT
9(-l)
WIS
11 (+0)
CHA
7 (-2)

Skills Stealth +3
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Aquan, Terran
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst of
sticky mud. Each Medium or smaller creature within 5 feet
of it must succeed on a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw or be
restrained until the end of the creature's next turn.
False Appearance. While the mephit remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from an ordinary mound of mud.

Actions
Fists. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Mud Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit belches viscid mud
onto one creature within 5 feet of it. If the target is Medium
or smaller, it must succeed on a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw
or be restrained for 1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
Smoke Mephit
Smoke mephits are crude, lazy creatures of aif
and fire that billow smoke constantly. They
rarely speak the truth and love to mock and
mislead other creatures.
Steam Mephit
Composed of fire and water, steam
mephits leave trails of hot water
wherever they go, and they hiss
With tendrils of steam. Bossy and
hypersensitive, they are the self-
appointed overlords of all mephits.
*_________________________________
I Variant: Mephit Summoning
j Some mephits can have an action option that allows them to
summon other mephits.
Summon Mephits (1/Day). The mephit has a 25 percent
chance of summoning ld4 mephits of its kind. A summoned
mephit appears in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of
its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and can't
summon other mephits. It remains for 1 minute, until it
or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it
as an action.

Steam Mephit
bj-~■ i aww,,..
■--------------
.....-                                                  ---------!
Smoke Mephit
Shall elfpiental, neutral evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
6 (-2)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
12 (+1)
INT          WIS
10 (+0)     10 (+0)
CHA
11 (+0)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities fire, poison
i Condition Immunities poisoned
' Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Auran, Ignan
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it leaves behind a cloud
of smoke that fills a 5-foot-radius sphere centered on its space.
The sphere is heavily obscured. Wind disperses the cloud,
which otherwise lasts for 1 minute.
Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast
dancing lights, requiring no material components. Its innate
| spellcasting ability is Charisma.
Actions
fei.yit.i.j. ■■    -       .           -Ma.lfcKfcM^KTfcW^ajmMJfa.
Steam Mephit
Small elemental, neutral evil
I Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
I creature. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
' Cinder Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone
| of smoldering ash. Each creature in that area must succeed on
I a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or be blinded until the end of
* the mephit's next turn.
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 21 (6d6)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
5 (-3)       11 (+0)     10 (+0)      11 (+0)     10 (+0)     12 (+1)
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Aquan, Ignan
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Death Burst. When the mephit dies,.it explodes in a cloud of
steam. Each creature within 5 feet of the mephit must succeed
on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or take 4 (ld8) fire damage.
Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast blur,
requiring no material components. Its innate spellcasting
ability is Charisma.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 2 (ld4) slashing damage plus 2 (ld4) fire damage.
Steam Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone
of scalding steam. Each creature in that area must succeed on
a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4 (ld8) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
■       ■      -                                  -            .,     ■   .    u       ...     ■
317

1

Merfolk
1
Aquatic humanoids with the upper body of a human and
[ the lower body of a fish, merfolk adorn their skin and
scales with shell decorations.
Merfolk tribes and kingdoms span the world, and
their people are as varied in color, culture, and outlook
as the human races of the surface. Land folk and
merfolk rarely meet except by chance, though star-eyed
mariners tell tales of romance with these creatures
along the shoals of faraway islands.
Merfolk lack the materials and practical means to
forge weapons beneath the waves, to write books and
keep lore, or to shape stone to raise buildings and
cities. As a result, most live in small hunter-gatherer
tribes, each of which holds unique values and creeds.
Only occasionally do merfolk unite under the rule of a
single leader. They do so to face a common threat or
to complete a conquest. Such unifications can be the
beginning of undersea kingdoms with dynasties lasting
hundreds of years.
Merfolk Settlements. Merfolk build their settlements
in vast undersea caverns, mazes of coral, the ruins of
sunken cities, or structures they carve from the rocky
seabed. They live in water shallow enough that the
passage of time can be marked by the gleam and fade
of sunlight through the water. In the reefs and trenches
near their settlements, merfolk harvest coral and farm
the seabed, shepherding schools of fish as land-based
farmers tend sheep. Only rarely do merfolk venture into
the darkest depths of the ocean. In such depths and
in their undersea caverns, merfolk rely on the light of
bioluminescent flora and fauna, such as jellyfish, whose
slow pulsing movements lend merfolk settlements an
otherworldly aesthetic.
Merfolk defend their communities with spears
crafted from whatever materials they can salvage from
shipwrecks, beaches, and dead undersea creatures.
Merfolk
Medium huifl'anoiid (merfolk), neutral
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 11 (2d8+2)
Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)      11 (+0)     11 (+0)      12 (+1)
Skills Perception +2
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Aquan, Common
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Amphibious. The merfolk can breathe air and water.
Actions
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (ld6) piercing damage,
or 4 (ld8) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
-i ' '■/■- ijij^   sl".-..^."    .....fa.' ■■'i^-.ji.-j.., *mwhjw.a.3gl
5>l8
h'Ol.K
"
Merrow
Merrow haunt coastal waters, preying on fisherfolk,
merfolk, and any other edible creature that crosses their
path. These savage monsters snatch and devour unwary
prey, hauling drowned corpses back to their underwater
grottoes to feed.
Transformed Merfolk. Long ago, a tribe of merfolk
found an idol of Demogorgon at the bottom of the sea.
Not knowing what it was, they brought the artifact
to their king. Everyone who touched the idol became
afflicted with madness, including the king, who decreed
that a sacrificial ritual be performed to open a gateway
to the Abyss. The ocean turned red with the blood of
slaughtered merfolk, but the ritual worked, and the
king led the survivors through the underwater gate
to Demogorgon's layer of the Abyss. The merfolk
remained there for generations, fighting for their lives
as the Abyss warped them completely, transforming
them into hulking, evil monstrosities. Thus, the first
merrow were born.
Coastal Bullies. Whenever an opportunity presents
itself, the Prince of Demons sends merrow back to
the Material Plane to wreak havoc in the oceans. The
merrow are bullies, attacking all creatures smaller and
we&ker than themselves.
Merrow dwell in undersea caves filled with treasures
and trophies, taken from their victims and sunken
ships. They tie the rotting corpses of dead enemies and
drowned sailors to strands of kelp to mark the borders
of their territory.
. fafj--t-Ji          ■   -        ■■. ,J*~S,JgMH
Merrow
Large monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6dl0 + 12)
Speed 10 ft,, swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      10 (+0)     15 (+2)       8(-l)      10 (+0)      9 (-1)
I  Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
1 Languages Abyssal, Aquan
I Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Amphibious. The merrow can breathe air and water.
I Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The merrow makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its claws or harpoon.
I Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.
■ Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) slashing damage.
J Harpoon. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach
5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing
j damage. If the target is a Huge or smaller creature, it must
I succeed on a Strength contest against the merrow or be pulled
j up to 20 feet toward the merrow.

Mimic
, fJleg"ium mdh'strosity (shapechanger), neutral
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 58 (9d8+18)
Speed 15 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)       12 (+1)      15 (+2)       5 (-3)      13 (+1)       8 (-1)
Skills Stealth +5
1 Damage Immunities acid
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
I Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Shapechanger. The mimic can use its action to polymorph into
I an object or back into its true, amorphous form. Its statistics
are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or
carrying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
Adhesive (Object Form Only). The mimic adheres to anything
that touches it. A Huge or smaller creature adhered to the
mimic is also grappled by it (escape DC 13). Ability checks
I made to escape this grapple have disadvantage.
False Appearance (Object Form Only). While the mimic
remains motionless, it is indistinguishable from an
ordinary object.
Crappler. The mimic has advantage on attack rolls against any
creature grappled by it.
Actions
Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the mimic is in
object form, the target is subjected to its Adhesive trait.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) acid damage.
Mimic
Mimics are shapeshifting predators able to take on
the form of inanimate objects to lure creatures to their
doom. In dungeons, these cunning creatures most often
take the form of doors and chests, having learned that
such forms attract a steady stream of prey.
Imitative Predators. Mimics can alter their
outward texture to resemble wood, stone, and other
basic materials, and they have evolved to assume the
appearance of objects that other creatures are likely to
come into contact with. A mimic in its altered form is
nearly unrecognizable until potential prey blunders into
its reach, whereupon the monster sprouts pseudopods
and attacks.
When it changes shape, a mimic excretes an adhesive
that helps it seize prey and weapons that touch it.
The adhesive is absorbed when the mimic assumes
its amorphous form and on parts the mimic uses to
move itself.
' Cunning Hunters. Mimics live and hunt alone, though
they occasionally share their feeding grounds with other
creatures. Although most mimics have only predatory
intelligence, a rare few evolve greater cunning and the
ability to carry on simple conversations in Common or
Undercommon. Such mimics might allow safe passage
through their domains or provide useful information in
exchange for food.

220
WMie
**»*
ju*t *
■J&*
»i)i
ove
**..«#**'
oo**"1
of
Mind Flayer
Mind flayers, also called illithlds, are the scourge of
sentient creatures across countless worlds. Psionic
tyrants, slavers, and interdimensional voyagers, they
are insidious masterminds that harvest entire races for
their own twisted ends. Four tentacles snake from their
octopus-like heads, flexing in hungry anticipation when
sentient creatures come near.
In eons past, illithids controlled empires that spanned
many worlds. They subjugated and consequently warped
whole races of humanoid slaves, including the githyanki
and githzerai, the grimlocks, and the kuo-toa. Conjoined
by a collective consciousness, the illithids hatch plots
as far-reaching and evil as their fathomless minds
can conceive.
Since the fall of their empires, illithid collectives on
the Material Plane have resided in the Underdark.
Psionic Commanders. Mind flayers possess psionic
powers that enable them to control the minds of
creatures such as troglodytes, grimlocks, quaggoths,
and ogres. Illithids prefer to communicate via telepathy
and use their telepathy when issuing commands to
their thralls.
When an illithid meets strong resistance, it avoids
initial combat as it orders its thralls to attack. Like
physical extensions of the illithid's thoughts, these
thralls interpose themselves between the mind
flayer and its foes, sacrificing their lives so that their
master can escape.
Hive Mind Colonies. Solitary mind flayers are likely
rogues and outcasts. Most illithids belong to a colony
of sibling mind flayers devoted to an elder brain—a
massive brain-like being that resides in a briny pool
near the center of a mind flayer community. From its
pool, an elder brain telepathically dictates its desires to
each individual mind flayer within 5 miles of it, for it is
able to hold multiple mental conversations at once.
Hanger of the Mind. Illithids subsist on the brains
of humanoids. The brains provide enzymes, hormones,
and psychic energy necessary for their survival. An
illithid healthy from a brain-rich diet secretes a thin
glaze of mucus that coats its mauve skin.
An illithid experiences euphoria as it devours
the brain of a humanoid, along with its memories,
personality, and innermost fears. Mind flayers will
sometimes harvest a brain rather than devour it, using it
as part of some alien experiment or transforming it into
an intellect devourer.

QUALITH
1 On the rare occasion that mind flayers need to write
something down, they do so in Qualith. This system of
tactile writing (similar to braille) is read by an illithid's
j tentacles. Qualith is written in four-line stanzas and is so
| alien in construction that non-illithids must resort to magic
, to discern its meaning. Though Qualith can be used to keep
| records, illithids most often use it to mark portals or other
surfaces with warnings or instructions.

Mind Flayer
Medium aberration, lawful evil
Armor Class 15 (breastplate)
Hit Points 71 (13d8+13)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      12 (+1)      12 (+1)      19 (+4)     17 (+3)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +6
Skills Arcana +7, Deception +6, Insight +6, Perception +6,
Persuasion +6, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Magic Resistance. The mind flayer has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The mind flayer's innate
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 15). It can
innately cast the following spells, requiring no components:
At will: detect thoughts, levitate
1/day each: dominate monster, plane shift (self only)
Actions_____________________________
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) psychic damage. If the target is
Medium or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 15) and must
succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned
until this grapple ends.
Extract Brain. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one incapacitated humanoid grappled by the mind flayer. Hit:
The target takes 55 (lOdlO) piercing damage. If this damage
reduces the target to 0 hit points, the mind flayer kills the
target by extracting and devouring its brain.
Mind Blast (Recharge 5-6). The mind flayer magically emits
psychic energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area
must succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or take
22 (4d8 + 4) psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. A
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Variant: Mind Flayer Arcanist
A few mind flayers supplement their psionic power with
arcane spells. However, they are regarded as deviants by their
illithid peers and usually shunned. A mind flayer arcanist has
a challenge rating of 8 (3,900 XP) and the following trait.
Spellcasting. The mind flayer is a lOth-level spellcaster.
Its spellcasting ability is Intelligence (save DC 15, +7 to hit
with spell attacks). The mind flayer has the following wizard
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): blade ward, dancing lights, mage hand,
shocking grasp
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, disguise self, shield, sleep
2nd level (3 slots): blur, invisibility, ray ofenfeeblement
3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, lightning bolt, sending
4th level (3 slots): confusion, hallucinatory terrain
5th level (2 slots): telekinesis, wall of force

222
WNtJ-'FLAYER
X
MiNOTAUR
A minotaur's roar is a savage battle cry that most
civilized creatures fear. Born into the mortal realm by
demonic rites, minotaurs are savage conquerors and
carnivores that live for the hunt. Their brown or black
fur is stained with the blood of fallen foes, and they
carry the stench of death.
The Beast Within. Most minotaurs are solitary
carnivores that roam labyrinthine dungeons, twisting
caves, primeval woods, and the maze-like streets and
passages of desolate ruins. A minotaur can visualize
every route it might take to close the distance to its prey.
The scent of blood, the tearing of flesh, and the
cracking of bones spur a minotaur's lust for carnage,
overwhelming all thought and reason. In a blood rage,
a minotaur charges anything it sees, butting and goring
like a battering ram, then chopping the fallen in twain.
Apart from ambushing creatures that wander into its
labyrinth, a minotaur cares little for strategy or tactics.
Minotaurs seldom organize, they don't respect authority
or hierarchy, and they are notoriously difficult to enslave,
let alone control.
Cults of the Horned King. Minotaurs are the dark
descendants of humanoids transformed by the rituals of
cults that reject the oppression of authority by returning
to nature. Inductees often mistake these cults for
druidic circles or totemic religions whose ceremonies
involve entering a labyrinth while wearing a ceremonial
animal mask.
Within these bounded environments, cultists hunt,
kill, and eat wild beasts, indulging their basest primal
urges. In the end, however, sacrificial animals are
exchanged for humanoid sacrifice—sometimes an
inductee that tried to escape the cult after learning its
secrets. These labyrinths become blood-soaked halls of
slaughter, echoing to the cultists' savagery.
Unknown to all but their highest-ranking leaders,
these mystery cults are creations of the demon lord
Baphomet, the Horned King, whose layer of the Abyss
is a gigantic labyrinth. Some of his followers are fervent
supplicants that plead for strength and power. Others
come to the cult seeking a life free from authority's
chains—and are liberated of their humanity instead as
Baphomet transforms them into the minotaurs that echo
his own savage form.
Although they begin as creations of the Horned King,
minotaurs can breed true with one another, giving rise
to an independent race of Baphomet's savage children
in the world.
Minotaur
Large monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 76 (9dl0 +27)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
18 (+4)
DEX
11 (+0)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
6 (-2)
WIS
16 (+3)
CHA
9(-l)

Skills Perception +7
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Abyssal
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Charge. If the minotaur moves at least 10 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or
be pushed up to 10 feet away and knocked prone.
Labyrinthine Recall. The minotaur can perfectly recall any path
it has traveled.
Reckless. At the start of its turn, the minotaur can gain
advantage on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during
that turn, but attack rolls against it have advantage until the
start of its next turn.
Actions
Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (2dl2 + 4) slashing damage.
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage.
MIMOTA<?]l
333
l—l
■j^MMi
'"i &fwr
MODRONS
Modrons are beings of absolute law that adhere to a
hive-like hierarchy. They inhabit the plane of Mechanus
and tend its eternally revolving gears, their existence a
' clockwork routine of perfect order.
Absolute Law and Order. Under the direction
of their leader, Primus, modrons increase order in
the multiverse in accordance with laws beyond the
comprehension of mortal minds. Their own minds
are networked in a hierarchal pyramid, in which
each modron receives commands from superiors and
delegates orders to underlings. A modron carries out
commands with total obedience, utmost efficiency, and
an absence of morality or ego.
Modrons have no sense of self beyond what is
necessary to fulfill their duties. They exist as a unified
collective, divided by ranks, yet they always refer to
themselves collectively.'To a modron, there is no "I," but
only "we" or "us."
Absolute Hierarchy. Modrons communicate only
with their own rank and the ranks immediately above
and below them. Modrons more than one rank away are
either too advanced or too simple to understand.
Cogs of the Great Machine. If a modron is destroyed,
its remains disintegrate. A replacement from the next
lowest rank then transforms in a flash of light, gaining
the physical form of its new rank. The promoted modron
is replaced by one of its underlings in the same manner,
all the way to the lowest levels of the hierarchy. There, a
new modron is created by Primus, with a steady stream
of monodrones leaving the Great Modron Cathedral on
Mechanus as a result.
The Great Modron March. When the gears of
Mechanus complete seventeen cycles once every 289
years, Primus sends a vast army of modrons across the
Outer Planes, ostensibly on a reconnaissance mission.
The march is long and dangerous, and only a small
number of modrons returns to Mechanus.
Monodrone
A monodrone can perform one simple task at a time and
can relay a single message of up to forty-eight words.
PJj'trODRONE____________________________
' The blocky duodrones supervise units of monodrones
and can perform up to two tasks at a time.
P00RONE
Pfcfrg&es are shaped like inverted pyramids. They lead
lesser modrons in battle.
:Qt%t>RONE
Astute combatants, quadrones serve as artillery and
field officers in the regiments of modron armies.
S*-
DRONE
Pentadrones oversee Mechanus's worker populace and
jtjatl improvise in response to new situations.

Variant: Rogue Modrons
A modron unit sometimes becomes defective, either through
natural decay or exposure to chaotic forces. Rogue modrons
don't act in accordance with Primus's wishes and directives,
breaking laws, disobeying orders, and even engaging in
violence. Other modrons hunt down such rogues.
A rogue modron loses the Axiomatic Mind trait and can
have any alignment other than lawful neutral. Otherwise, it
has the same statistics as a regular modron of its rank.
Monodrone
Medium construct, lawful neutral

Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 5 (ld8 + l)
| Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)       4 (-3)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Modron
I Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Axiomatic Mind. The monodrone can't be compelled to act in a
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions.
Disintegration. If the monodrone dies, its body disintegrates
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it
was carrying.
Actions
Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage.
.—^-j-^tj  ,   ■ ■-.—*i"-.f-»UMB.tfcnu»J»^E:
224
LI wpttgam
-.   MWJ-
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 16 (3d8 +3)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)      10 (+0)       7 (-2)
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Modron
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Axiomatic Mind. The duodrone can't be compelled to act in a
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions.
Disintegration. If the duodrone dies, its body disintegrates
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it
was carrying.
Actions
Multiattack. The duodrone makes two fist attacks or two
javelin attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage.

STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       13 (+1)      12 (+1)       9 (-1)      10 (+0)       9 (-1)
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Modron
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Axiomatic Mind. The tridrone can't be compelled to act in a
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions.
Disintegration. If the tridrone dies, its body disintegrates
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it
was carrying.
Actions
Multiattack. The tridrone makes three fist attacks or three
javelin attacks.
I Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
3 (ld4 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage.
a     c
M (' I* !
•     2*5
QUADRONE
I Medium construct, lawful neutral
Large construct, lawful neutral
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
HitPoints32(5dlO + 5)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
12 (+1)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
12 (+1)
INT
10 (+0)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
11 (+0)
Skills Perception +2
l Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12
< Languages Modron
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
^1 Wfi*
I Axiomatic Mind. The quadrone can't be compelled to act in a
I manner contrary to its nature or its instructions.
j Disintegration. If the quadrone dies, its body disintegrates
■ into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it
was carrying.
Actions
i Multiattack. The quadrone makes two fist attacks or four
shortbow attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
3 (ld4+ 1) bludgeoning damage.
', Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) piercing damage.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      13 (+1)
Skills Perception +4
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Modron
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Axiomatic Mind. The pentadrone can't be compelled to act in a
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions.
Disintegration. If the pentadrone dies, its body disintegrates
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it
was carrying.

Actions
<
Multiattack. The pentadrone makes five arm attacks.
Arm. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Paralysis Cas (Recharge 5-6). The pentadrone exhales a 30-
foot cone of gas. Each creature in that area must succeed on a
DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute.
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
3S6
t* modboms
-v,
Mummies
Raised by dark funerary rituals, a mummy shambles
from the shrouded stillness of a time-lost temple or
tomb. Having been awoken from its rest, it punishes
transgressors with the power of its unholy curse.
Preserved Wrath. The long burial rituals that
accompany a mummy's entombment help protect
its body from rot. In the embalming process, the
newly dead creature's organs are removed and
placed in special jars, and its corpse is treated with
preserving oils, herbs, and wrappings. After the body
has been prepared, the corpse is typically wrapped in
linen bandages.
The Will of Dark Gods. An undead mummy is created
when the priest of a death god or other dark deity
ritually imbues a prepared corpse with necromantic
magic. The mummy's linen wrappings are inscribed
with necromantic markings before the burial ritual
concludes with an invocation to darkness. As a
mummy endures in undeath, it animates in response
to conditions specified by the ritual. Most commonly,
a transgression against its tomb, treasures, lands, or
former loved ones will cause a mummy to rise.
The Punished. Once deceased, an individual has no
say in whether or not its body is made into a mummy.
Some mummies were powerful individuals who
displeased a high priest or pharaoh, or who committed
crimes of treason, adultery, or murder. As punishment,
they were cursed with eternal undeath, embalmed,
mummified, and sealed away. Other times, mummies
acting as tomb guardians are created from slaves put to
death specifically to serve a greater purpose.
Creature of Ritual. A mummy obeys the conditions
and parameters laid down by the rituals that created it,
driven only to punish transgressors. The overwhelming
terror that foreshadows a mummy's attack can leave
the intended victim paralyzed with fright. In the days
following a mummy's touch, a victim's body rots from
the outside in, until nothing but dust remains.
Ending a Mummy's Curse. Rare magic can undo or
dispel the ritual that gave rise to a mummy, allowing it
to truly die. More commonly, a mummy can be sent back
to its endless rest by undoing the transgression that
caused it to rise. A sacred idol might be replaced in its
niche, a stolen treasure could be returned to its tomb, or
a temple might be purified of despoiling bloodshed.
More ephemeral or permanent offenses, such as
revealing a secret the mummy wished kept or killing
an individual the mummy loved, can't be so easily
remedied. In such cases, a mummy might slaughter all
the creatures responsible and still not sate its wrath.
Undead Archives. Though they seldom bother to
do so, mummies can speak. As a result, some serve as
undead repositories of lost lore, and can be consulted by
the descendants of those who created them. Powerful
individuals sometimes intentionally sequester mummies
away for occasional consultation.
Undead Nature. A mummy doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Mummy Lord
iQ<1 ,' V W.-fi.
In the tombs of the ancients, tyrannical monarchs and
the high priests of dark gods lie in dreamless rest,
waiting for the time when they might reclaim their
thrones and reforge their ancient empires. The regalia
of their terrible rule still adorns their linen-wrapped
bodies, their moldering robes stitched with evil symbols
and bronze armor etched with devices of dynasties-that
fell a thousand years before.
Under the direction of the most powerful priests,
the ritual that creates a mummy can be increased in
potency. The mummy lord that rises from suclj &'ritual
retains the memories and personality of its former
life, and is gifted with supernatural resilience. Dead
emperors wield the same infamous rune-marked
blades that they did in legend. Sorcerer lords work
the forbidden magic that once controlled a terrified
populace, and the dark gods reward dead priest-kings'
prayers by imparting divine spells.
Heart of the Mummy Lord. As part of the ritual that
creates a mummy lord, the creature's heart and viscera
are removed from the corpse and placed in canopic jars.
These jars are usually carved from limestone or made of
pottery, etched or painted with religious hieroglyphs.
As long as its shriveled heart remains intact, a
mummy lord can't be permanently destroyed. When
it drops to 0 hit points, the mummy lord turns to dust
and re-forms at full strength 24 hours later, rising out
of dust in close proximity to the canopic jar containing
its heart. A mummy lord can be destroyed or prevented
from re-forming by burning its heart to ashes. For this
reason, a mummy lord usually keeps its heart and
viscera in a hidden tomb or vault.
The mummy lord's heart has AC 5, 25 hit points, and
immunity to all damage except fire.

^*tm
•*
'Before opening a sarcophagus, l
»^-Xthe Mystic'^
IGHT A TORCH."
t" RULE OF DUNGEON SURVIVAL
M&
J^^tES
A Mummy Lord's Lair
A mummy lord watches over an ancient temple or tomb
that is protected by lesser undead and rigged with
traps. Hidden in this temple is the sarcophagus where a
mummy lord keeps its greatest treasures.
A mummy lord encountered in its lair has a challenge
rating of 16 (15,000 XP).
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the mummy
lord takes a lair action to cause one of the following
effects; the mummy lord can't use the same effect two
rounds in a row.
• Each undead creature in the lair can pinpoint the loca-
tion of each living creature within 120 feet of it until
initiative count 20 on the next round.
feJ-'^a..                              ^~*jfeMi.'
--  ■   .   ■        1
Mummy
Medium undead, lawful evil
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 58 (9d8+ 18)
Speed 20 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX
8(-1)
CON
15 (+2)
INT
6 (-2)
WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      12 (+1)
Saving Throws Wis +2
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The mummy can use its Dreadful Clare and
makes one attack with its rotting fist.
Rotting Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6)
necrotic damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on
a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with mummy
rot. The cursed target can't regain hit points, and its hit point
maximum decreases by 10 (3d6) for every 24 hours that elapse.
If the curse reduces the target's hit point maximum to 0, the
target dies, and its body turns to dust. The curse lasts until
removed by the remove curse spell or other magic.
Dreadful Clare. The mummy targets one creature it can see
within 60 feet of it. If the target can see the mummy, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw against this magic
or become frightened until the end of the mummy's next
turn. If the target fails the saving throw by 5 or more, it is also
paralyzed for the same duration. A target that succeeds on the
saving throw is immune to the Dreadful Clare of all mummies
(but not mummy lords) for the next 24 hours
-1=^. an i-^- ■*■ '.hJW
J^S^SBS




•  Each undead in the lair has advantage on saving
throws against effects that turn undead until initiative
count 20 on the next round.
•  Until initiative count 20 on the next round, any
non-undead creature that tries to cast a spell of 4th
level or lower in the mummy lord's lair is wracked
with pain. The creature can choose another action,
but if it tries to cast the spell, it must make a DC 16
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, it takes
ld6 necrotic damage per level of the spell, and the
spell has no effect and is wasted.
Regional Effects
A mummy lord's temple or tomb is warped in any of the
following ways by the creature's dark presence:
Mummy Lord
Medium undead, lawful evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 97 (13d8 +39)
Speed 20 ft.
STR
18 (+4)
DEX
10 (+0)
CON
17 (+3)
INT
11 (+0)
WIS
18 (+4)
CHA
16 (+3)
Saving Throws Con +8, Int +5, Wis +9, Cha +8
Skills History +5, Religion +5
| Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
I Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages the languages it knew in life
V Challenge 15 (13,000 XP)
Magic Resistance. The mummy lord has advantage on saving
I throws against spells and other magical effects.
I Rejuvenation. A destroyed mummy lord gains a new body in
I 24 hours if its heart is intact, regaining all its hit points and
', becoming active again. The new body appears within 5 feet of
j the mummy lord's heart.
1 Spellcasting. The mummy lord is a lOth-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit
with spell attacks). The mummy lord has the following cleric
J spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): sacred flame, thaumaturgy
I 1st level (4 slots): command, guiding bolt, shield offaith
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, silence, spiritual weapon
3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, dispel magic
4th level (3 slots): divination, guardian offaith
I 5th level (2 slots): contagion, insect plague
6th level (1 slot): harm
Actions_____________________________
i Multiattack. The mummy can use its Dreadful Clare and
J makes one attack with its rotting fist.
Rotting Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
I target. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 21 (6d6)
•  Food instantly molders and water instantly evaporates.
when brought into the lair. Other nonmagicaLdrinki=8
are spoiled—wine turning to vinegar, for instance.
•  Divination spells cast within the lair by creatures
other than the mummy lord have a 25 percent chance
to provide misleading results, as determined by the
DM. If a divination spell already has a chance to fail
or become unreliable when cast multiple times,'that   :
chance increases by 25 percent.
•  A creature that takes treasure from the lair is cursed
until the treasure is returned. The cursed target has
disadvantage on all saving throws. The curse'laSts
until removed by a remove curse spell or other magic.
If the mummy lord is destroyed, these regional effects
end immediately.
necrotic damage. If the target is a cre,ature, it must succeed on
a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be cursed With mummy
rot. The cursed target can't regain hit points, and Its hit point
maximum decreases by 10 (3d6) for every 24 hours that elapse.
If the curse reduces the target's hit point maximum to 0, the
target dies, and its body turns to dust. The curse lasts until
removed by the remove curse spell or other magic.
Dreadful Clare. The mummy lord targets one creature it can
see within 60 feet of it. If the target can seethe mummy lord,
it must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw against this
magic or become frightened until the end of the mummy's next!
turn. If the target fails the saving throw by 5 or more, it is also
paralyzed for the same duration. A target that succeeds on the
saving throw is immune to the Dreadful Clare of all mummies
and mummy lords for the next 24 hours.
Legendary Actions____________________
The mummy lord can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
The mummy lord regains spent legendary actions at the start
of its turn.
Attack. The mummy lord makes one attack with its rotting fist
or uses its Dreadful Clare.
Blinding Dust. Blinding dust and sand swirls magically around
the mummy lord. Each creature within 5 feet of the mummy
lord must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or
be blinded until the end of the creature's next turn.
Blasphemous Word (Costs 2 Actions). The mummy lord utters
a blasphemous word. Each non-undead creature within 10
feet of the mummy lord that can hear the magical utterance
must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be
stunned until the end of the mummy lord's next turn.
Channel Negative Energy (Costs 2 Actions). The mummy lord
magically unleashes negative energy. Creatures within 60
feet of the mummy lord, including ones behind barriers and
around corners, can't regain hit points until the end of the
mummy lord's next turn.
Whirlwind of Sand (Costs 2 Actions). The mummy lord
magically transforms into a whirlwind of sand, moves up to
60 feet, and reverts to its normal form. While in whirlwind
form, the mummy lord is immune to all damage, and it
can't be grappled, petrified, knocked prone, restrained, or
stunned. Equipment worn or carried by the mummy lord
remain in its possession.
«4P>
-
229

Mygonids
ftlyconids are intelligent, ambulatory fungi that live
in the Underdark, seek enlightenment, and deplore
violence. If approached peacefully, myconids gladly
provide shelter or allow safe passage through
their colonies.
Circles and Melds. The largest myconid in a colony
is its sovereign, which presides over one or more social
groups called circles. A circle consists of twenty or more
myconids that work, live, and meld together.
A meld is a form of communal meditation that
allows myconids to transcend their dull subterranean
existence. The myconids' rapport spores bind the
participants into a group consciousness. Hallucination
spores then induce a shared dream that provides
entertainment and social interaction. Myconids consider
melding to be the purpose of their existence. They use
it in the pursuit of higher consciousness, collective
union, and spiritual apotheosis. Myconids also use their
rapport spores to communicate telepathically with other
sentient creatures.
Myconid Reproduction. Like other fungi, myconids
reproduce by mundane sporing. They carefully control
their spores' release to avoid overpopulation.
Spore Servant Template__________
A spore servant is any Large or smaller creature brought
back to life by the animating spores of a myconid
sovereign. A creature that was never flesh and blood
Myconid Sprout
• Small plant, lawful neutral
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
8 (-1)       10 (+0)     10 (+0)       8 (-1)      11 (+0)       5 (-3)
1 Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Distress Spores. When the myconid takes damage, all other
myconids within 240 feet of it can sense its pain.
Sun Sickness. While in sunlight, the myconid has disadvantage
on ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws. The myconid
dies if it spends more than 1 hour in direct sunlight.
Actions
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
1 (ld4 - 1) bludgeoning damage plus 2 (1d4) poison damage.
Rapport Spores (3/Day). A 10-foot radius of spores extends
from the myconid. These spores can go around corners and
affect only creatures with an Intelligence of 2 or higherthat
aren't undead, constructs, or elementals. Affected creatures
can communicate telepathically with one another while they are
within 30 feet of each other. The effect lasts for 1 hour.
to begin with (such as a construct, Ifemeh^l.'ooze,
plant, or undead) can't be turned into a spore servant.
The following characteristics change or are added to a
creature that becomes a spore servant.
Retained Characteristics. The servant retains its
Armor Class, hit points, Hit Dice, Strength, Dexterity,
Constitution, vulnerabilities, resistances, and immunities.
Lost Characteristics. The servant loses its original
saving throw and skill bonuses, special senses, and
special traits. It loses any action that isn't Multiattack or
a melee weapon attack that deals bludgeoning, piercing,
or slashing damage. If it has an action or a melee weapon
attack that deals some other type of damage, it loses the
ability to deal damage of that type, unless the damage
comes from a piece of equipment, such as a magic item.
Type. The servant's type is plant, and it loses any tags.
Alignment. The servant is unaligned.
Speed. Reduce all the servant's speeds by 10 feet, to a
minimum of 5 feet.
Ability Scores. The servant's ability scores change as
follows: Int 2 (-4), Wis 6 (-2), Cha 1 (-5).
Senses. The servant has blindsight with a radius of
30 feet, and it is blind beyond this radius.
Condition Immunities. The servant can't be blinded,
charmed, frightened, or paralyzed.
Languages. The servant loses all known languages,
but it responds to orders given to it by myconids using
rapport spores. The servant gives highest priority to
orders received from the most powerful myconid.
Attacks. If the servant has no other means of dealing
damage, it can use its fists or limbs to make unarmed
strikes. On a hit, an unarmed strike deals bludgeoning
damage equal to ld4 + the servant's Strength modifier,
or, if the servant is Large, 2d4 + its Strength modifier.
Sample Spore Servant
This spore servant statistics presented here use a
quaggoth as the base creature.
Quaggoth Spore Servant
Medium plant, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6d8+ 18)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)       2 (-4)       6 (-2)        1 (-5)
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Actions__________^_________________
Multiattack. The spore servant makes two claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.

1
230
, ; MYCONIDS
I
dh»V-. '*';
•

Mygonid Sovereign
Large plant, lawful neutral
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 60 (8dl0+ 16)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      10 (+0)      14 (+2)       13 (+1)      15 (+2)      10 (+0)
Senses darkvision 120 ft..
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
passive Perception 12
Mygonid Adult
Medium plant, lawful neutral
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      10 (+0)      12 (+1)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)       7 (-2)
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Distress Spores. When the myconid takes damage, all other
myconids within 240 feet of it can sense its pain.
Sun Sickness. While in sunlight, the myconid has disadvantage
on ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws. The myconid
dies if it spends more than 1 hour in direct sunlight.
.Actions
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage plus 5 (2d4) poison damage.
Pacifying Spores (3/Day). The myconid ejects spores at one
creature it can see within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be stunned for 1
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Rapport Spores. A 20-foot radius of spores extends from the
myconid. These spores can go around corners and affect only
creatures with an Intelligence of 2 or higher that aren't undead,
constructs, orelementals. Affected creatures can communicate
telepathically with one another while they are within 30 feet of
each other. The effect lasts for 1 hour.
Distress Spores. When the myconid takes damage, all other
myconids within 240 feet of it can sense its pain.
Sun Sickness. While in sunlight, the myconid has disadvantage
on ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws. The myconid
dies if it spends more than 1 hour in direct sunlight.
Actions
Multiattack. The myconid uses either its Hallucination Spores
or its Pacifying Spores, then makes a fist attack.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
8 (3d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (3d4) poison damage.
Animating Spores (3/Day). The myconid targets one corpse of
a humanoid or a Large or smaller beast within 5 feet of it and
releases spores at the corpse. In 24 hours, the corpse rises as a
spore servant. The corpse stays animated for ld4 + 1 weeks or
until destroyed, and it can't be animated again in this way.
Hallucination Spores. The myconid ejects spores at one
creature it can see within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed
on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for
1 minute. The poisoned target is incapacitated while it
hallucinates. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Pacifying Spores. The myconid ejects spores at one creature
it can see within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC
12 Constitution saving throw or be stunned for 1 minute. The
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the condition on itself on a success.
Rapport Spores. A 30-foot radius of spores extends from the
myconid. These spores can go around corners and affect only
creatures with an Intelligence of 2 or higher that aren't undead,
constructs, or elementals. Affected creatures can communicate
telepathically with one another while they are within 30 feet of
each other. The effect lasts for 1 hour.
232
MYCONIDS
snc-
I


Nagas
Nagas are intelligent serpents that inhabit the ruins of
the past, amassing arcane treasures and knowledge.
The first nagas were created as immortal guardians
by a humanoid race long lost to history. When this race
died out, the nagas deemed themselves the rightful
inheritors of their masters' treasures and magical lore.
Industrious and driven, nagas occasionally venture
out from their lairs to track down magic items or
rare spellbooks.
Nagas never feel the ravages of time or succumb to
sickness. Even if it is struck down, a naga's immortal
spirit reforms in a new body in a matter of days, ready to
continue its eternal work.
Benevolent Dictators and Brutal Tyrants. A naga
rules its domain with absolute authority. Whether it
f ules with compassion or by terrorizing its subjects, the
naga believes itself the master of all other creatures that
inhabit its domain.
Rivalry. Nagas have a long-standing enmity with the
yuan-ti, with each race seeing itself as the epitome of
serpentine evolution. Though cooperation between
them is rare, nagas and yuan-ti sometimes set aside
their differences to work toward common objectives.
However, yuan-ti always chafe under a naga's authority.
Immortal Nature. A naga doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
B'qM&Naga
In response to the long history of conflict between the
yuan-ti and the nagas, yuan-ti created a necromantic
ritual that could halt a naga's resurrection by
transforming the living naga into a skeletal undead
servitor. A bone naga retains only a few of the spells it
knew in life.
Guardian Naga
Wise and good, the beautiful guardian nagas protect
sacred places and items of magical power from falling
into evil hands. In their hidden redoubts, they research
spells and hatch convoluted plots to thwart the evil
designs of their enemies.
A guardian naga doesn't seek out violence, warning off
intruders rather than attacking. Only if its foes persist
does the naga attack, accosting enemies with its spells
and poisonous spittle.
Spirit Naga
Spirit nagas live in gloom and spitefulness, constantly
plotting vengeance against creatures that have wronged
them—or that they believe have wronged them. Lairing
in dismal caverns and ruins, they devote their time to
developing new spells and enslaving the mortals with
which tbey surround themselves. A spirit naga likes to
charm its foes, drawing them close so that it can sink its
poisonous fangs into their flesh.
Bone Naga
Large undead, lawful evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 58 (9dl0 + 9)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      16 (+3)      12 (+1)       15 (+2)     15 (+2)      16 (+3)
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Common plus one other language
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Spellcasting. The naga is a 5th-level spellcaster (spell save
I DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks) that needs only verbal
components to cast its spells.
If the naga was a guardian naga in life, its spellcasting ability
I is Wisdom, and it has the following cleric spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mending, sacred flame, thaumaturgy
I 1st level (4 slots): command, shield of faith
2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person
3rd level (2 slots): bestow curse
If the naga was a spirit naga in life, its spellcasting ability is
Intelligence, and it has the following wizard spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, ray of frost
1st level (4 slots): charm person, sleep
j 2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, hold person
■ 3rd level (2 slots): lightning bolt
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.
Hit: 10 (2d6+ 3) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage.
'  ■■a
233
sUFF«fo«^          oeFlLUs,
^
Spirit Naga
Large monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
I Hit Points 75 (10dl0 +20)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      17 (+3)      14 (+2)      16 (+3)     15 (+2)      16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +5, Wis +5, Cha +6
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned
I Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Common
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Rejuvenation. If it dies, the naga returns to life in ld6 days and
regains all its hit points. Only a wish spell can prevent this trait
from functioning.
Spellcasting. The naga is a lOth-level spellcaster. Its
I spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit
I with spell attacks), and it needs only verbal components to cast
its spells. It has the following wizard spells prepared:
1 Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, ray of frost
1st level (4 slots): charm person, detect magic, sleep
I 2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, hold person
3rd level (3 slots): lightning bolt, water breathing
4th level (3 slots): blight, dimension door
5th level (2 slots): dominate person
Actions
^
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must make
a DC 13 Constitution saving throw, taking 31 (7d8) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Guardian Naga
Large monstrosity, lawful good

234


Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (15dl0 +45)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      18 (+4)      16 (+3)      16 (+3)     19 (+4)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +7, Int +7, Wis +8, Cha +8
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Celestial, Common
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)

Rejuvenation. If it dies, the naga returns to life in ld6 days and   I
regains all its hit points. Only a wish spell can prevent this trait
from functioning.
Spellcasting. The naga is an nth-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with
spell attacks), and it needs only verbal components to cast its
spells. It has the following cleric spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mending, sacred flame, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): command, cure wounds, shield of faith
2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person
3rd level (3 slots): bestow curse, clairvoyance
4th level (3 slots): banishment, freedom of movement
5th level (2 slots): flame strike, geas
6th level (1 slot): true seeing
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.   L
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must make
a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Spit Poison. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 15/30 ft.,
one creature. Hit: The target must make a DC 15 Constitution
saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) poison damage on a failed save,   I
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Nightmare
Large fiend, neutral evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8dl0+24)
Speed 60 ft., fly 90 ft.
STR           DEX        CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)      15 (+2)
Nightmare
Damage Immunities fire
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages understands Abyssal, Common, and Infernal but
can't speak
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Confer Fire Resistance. The nightmare can grant resistance to
fire damage to anyone riding it.
Illumination. The nightmare sheds bright light in a 10-foot
radius and dim light for an additional 10 feet.
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6)
fire damage.
Ethereal Stride. The nightmare and up to three willing creatures
within 5 feet of it magically enter the Ethereal Plane from the
Material Plane, or vice versa.
A nightmare appears in a cloud of roiling smoke, its
mane, tail, and hooves wreathed in flame. The creature's
unearthly black form moves with supernatural speed,
vanishing in a cloud of brimstone as quickly as
it appeared.
Dread Steed. Also called a "demon horse" or "hell
horse," the nightmare serves as a steed for creatures of
exceptional evil, carrying demons, devils, death knights,
liches, night hags, and other vile monsters. It resembles
a fiendish horse, and a nightmare's fiery red eyes betray
its malevolent intelligence.
A nightmare can be summoned from the Lower
Planes, but unless a worthy sacrifice is offered to it as
food upon its arrival, the nightmare displays no special
loyalty to the creature it serves.
Creating a Nightmare. Nightmares don't appear
naturally in the multiverse. They must be created from
pegasi. The ritual that creates a nightmare requiresthe;
torturous removal of a pegasus's wings, driving that
noble creature to evil as it is transformed by dark magic.
NoTHiq
Medium aberration, neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6d8+18)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
14 (+2)
DEX
16 (+3)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
13 (+1)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)
Skills Arcana +3, Insight +4, Perception +2, Stealth +5
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Undercommon
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Keen Sight. The nothic has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Ml*.
1 Multiattack. The nothic makes two claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Rotting Gaze. The nothic targets one creature it can see
within 30 feet of it. The target m ust succeed on a DC 12
Constitution saving throw against this magic or take 10 (3d6)
necrotic damage.
Weird Insight. The nothic targets one creature it can see within
I 30 feet of it. The target must contest its Charisma (Deception)
check against the nothic's Wisdom (Insight) check. If the
nothic wins, it magically learns one fact or secret about
I the target. The target automatically wins if it is immune to
I being charmed.
'                             -  -                          -   ■           ■ '■'
Nothic
A baleful eye peers out from the darkness, its
gleam hinting at a weird intelligence and unnerving
malevolence. Most times, a nothic is content to watch,
weighing and assessing the creatures it encounters.
When driven to violence, it uses its horrific gaze to rot
the flesh from its enemies' bones.
Cursed Arcanists. Rather than gaining the godlike
supremacy they crave, some wizards who devote
their lives to unearthing arcane secrets are reduced
to creeping, tormented monsters by a dark curse left
behind by Vecna, a powerful lich who, in some worlds,
has transcended his undead existence to become a god
of secrets. Nothics retain no awareness of their former
selves, skulking amid the shadows and haunting places
rich in magical knowledge, drawn by memories and
impulses they can't quite understand.
Dark Oracles. Nothics possess a strange magical
insight that allows them to extract knowledge from
other creatures. This grants them unique understanding
of secret and forbidden lore, which they share for a
price. A nothic covets magic items, greedily accepting
such gifts from creatures that seek out its knowledge.
Lurkers in Magical Places. Nothics are notorious
for infiltrating arcane academies and other places
rich in magical learning. They are driven by the vague
knowledge that there exists a method to reverse their
condition. This isn't a clear sense of purpose, but rather
an obsessive tug at the end of the mind. Some nothics
are clever enough to realize that this is merely part of
the strange lesson for their folly, a false hope to drive
them to seek out more arcane secrets.
s&6
Ogre
Large giant, chaotic evil
Armor Class 11 (hide armor)
Hit Points 59 (7dl0+ 21)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)       8(-l)       16 (+3)       5 (-3)       7 (-2)        7 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions
Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Ogres
Ogres are as lazy of mind as they are strong of body.
They live by raiding, scavenging, and killing for food and
pleasure. The average adult specimen stands between 9
and 10 feet tall and weighs close to a thousand pounds.
Furious Tempers. Ogres are notorious for their quick
tempers, which flare at the smallest perceived offense.
Insults and name-calling can rouse an ogre's wrath in
an instant—as can stealing from it, bumping, jabbing, or
prodding it, laughing, making faces, or simply looking at
it the wrong way. When its rage is incited, an ogre lashes
out in a frustrated tantrum until it runs out of objects or
creatures to smash.
Gruesome Gluttons. Ogres eat almost anything, but
they especially enjoy the taste of dwarves, halflings,
and elves. When they can, they combine dinner with
pleasure, chasing scurrying victims around before
eating them raw. If enough of its victim remains
after the ogre has gorged itself, it might make a
loincloth from its quarry's skin and a necklace from its
leftover bones. This macabre crafting is the height of
ogre culture.
Greedy Collectors. An ogre's eyes glitter with
avarice when it sees the possessions of others. Ogres
carry rough sacks on their raids, which they fill with
fabulous "treasure" taken from their victims. This might
include a collection of battered helmets, a moldy wheel
of cheese, a rough patch of animal fur fastened like a
cloak, or a squealing, mud-spattered pig. Ogres also
delight in the gleam of gold and silver, and they will
fight one another over small handfuls of coins. Smarter
creatures can earn an ogre's trust by offering it gold or a
weapon forged for a creature of its size.
Legendary Stupidity. Few ogres can count to ten,
even with their fingers in front of them. Most speak only
a rudimentary form of Giant and know a smattering of
Common words. Ogres believe what they are told and
are easy to fool or confuse, but they break things they
don't understand. Silver-tongued tricksters who test
their talents on these savages typically end up eating
their eloquent words—and then being eaten in turn.
Primitive Wanderers. Ogres clothe themselves in
animal pelts and uproot trees for use as crude tools
and weapons. They create stone-tipped javelins for
hunting. When they establish lairs, they settle near
the rural edges of civilized lands, taking advantage of •
poorly protected livestock, undefended larders, and
unwary farmers.
An ogre sleeps in caves, animal dens, or under trees
until it finds a cabin or isolated farmhouse, whereupon
it kills the inhabitants and lairs there. Whenever it is
bored or hungry, an ogre ventures out from its lair,
attacking anything that crosses its path. Only after ati>-
ogre has depleted an area of food does it move on.
237
338
•*o«t. «>-«"fc !VRT0LW,«t. th. S— o. C«.
Ogre Gangs. Ogres sometimes band together in
small, nomadic groups, but they lack a true sense of
tribalism. When bands of ogres meet, one might attempt
to capture the members of the other group to increase
its numbers. However, ogre bands are just as likely to
trade members freely, especially if the welcoming band
is temporarily flush with food and weapons.
Whenever possible, ogres gang up with other
monsters to bully or prey on creatures weaker than
themselves. They associate freely with goblinoids, ores,
and trolls, and practically worship giants. In the giants'
complex social structure (known as the ordning), ogres
rank beneath the lowest giants in status. As a result, an
ogre will do nearly anything a giant asks.
Half-Ogre (Ogrillon)__________
When an ogre mates with a human, hobgoblin, bugbear,
or ore, the result is always a half-ogre. (Ogres don't
mate with dwarves, halflings, or elves. They eat them.)
Human mothers rarely survive the birth of a half-
ogre offspring.
The half-ogre offspring of an ogre and an ore is also
called an ogrillon. An adult half-ogre or ogrillon stands
8 feet tall and weighs 450 pounds on average.
QGRES
Half-Ogre
Large giant, Wy chaotic alignment
Armor Class 12 (hide armor)
HitPoints30(4dlO + 8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      10 (+0)     14 (+2)       7 (-2)       9 (-1)      10 (+0)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Actions
i Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
| target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 14 (2dl0 + 3)
j slashing damage if used with two hands.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage.
X
J
ONi
In nursery rhymes, oni are fearsome bogeymen that
haunt the nightmares of children and adults alike, yet
they are very real and always hungry. They find human
babies especially delicious. Oni look like demonic ogres
with blue or green skin, dark hair, and a pair of short
ivory horns protruding from their foreheads. Their eyes
are dark with strikingly white pupils, and their teeth and
claws are jet black.
Night Haunters. By the light of day, an oni hides
its true form with magic, gaining the trust of those
it intends to betray when darkness descends. These
creatures can change their size as well as their shape,
appearing as humanoids as they pass through towns,
pretending to be travelers, woodcutters, or frontier folk.
In such a form, an oni takes stock of the selection of
humanoids in a settlement and devises ways to abduct
and devour some of them.
Magical Ogres. Oni are sometimes called ogre mages
because of their innate magical ability. Though they
are only distantly related to true ogres, they share the
ogres' habit of joining forces with other evil creatures.
An oni serves a master if doing so proves lucrative or
provides it with a luxurious, well-defended home. Oni A
covet magic, and they work for evil wizards and hags in
exchange for useful magic items.
T--°—.cpr™.
-CH(L0REN<SRHyME
Oni
Large giant, lawful evil
Armor Class 16 (chain mail)
Hit Points 110 (13dl0 + 39)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
4    19 (+4)      11 (+0)      16 (+3)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +6, Wis +4, Cha +5
Skills Arcana +5, Deception +8, Perception +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The oni's innate spellcasting ability is
! Charisma (spell save DC 13). The oni can innately cast the
' following spells, requiring no material components:
} At will: darkness, invisibility
1/day each: charm person, cone of cold, gaseous form, sleep
i   . -- ■         .   '       ■--.--         '-  ^-^-^
Magic Weapons. The oni's weapon attacks are magical.
Regeneration. The oni regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Actions
Multiattack. The oni makes two attacks, either with its claws
or its glaive.
Claw (Oni Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5
ft., one target. Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage.
Claive. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (ldlO + 4) slashing
damage in Small or Medium form.
Change Shape. The oni magically polymorphs into a Small or
Medium humanoid, into a Large giant, or back into its true
form. Other than its size, its statistics are the same in each
form. The only equipment that is transformed is its glaive,
which shrinks so that it can be wielded in humanoid form. If
the oni dies, it reverts to its true form, and its glaive reverts to
its normal size.
"' .
-■    -
1
*«- ^^*-'
3S^3

239
Oozes
*
i
Oozes thrive in the dark, shunning areas of bright light
and extreme temperatures. They flow through the damp
underground, feeding on any creature or object that
can be dissolved, slinking along the ground, dripping
from walls and ceilings, spreading across the edges
of underground pools, and squeezing through cracks.
The first warning an adventurer receives of an ooze's
presence is often the searing pain of its acidic touch.
Oozes are drawn to movement and warmth. Organic
material nourishes them, and when prey is scarce they
feed on grime, fungus, and offal. Veteran explorers know
that an immaculately clean passageway is a likely sign
that an ooze lairs nearby.
Slow Death. An ooze kills its prey slowly. Some
varieties, such as black puddings and gelatinous cubes,
engulf creatures to prevent escape. The only upside
of this torturous death is that a victim's comrades can
come to the rescue before it is too late.
Since not every ooze digests every type of substance,
some have coins, metal gear, bones, and other debris
suspended within their quivering bodies. A slain ooze
can be a rich source of treasure for its killers.
Unwitting Servants. Although an ooze lacks the
intelligence to ally itself with other creatures, others that
understand an ooze's need to feed might lure it into a
location where it can be of use to them. Clever monsters
keep oozes around to defend passageways or consume
refuse. Likewise, an ooze can be enticed into a pit trap,
where its captors feed it often enough to prevent it from
coming after them. Crafty creatures place torches and
flaming braziers in strategic areas to dissuade an ooze
from leaving a particular tunnel or room.
Spawn ofjuiblex. According to the Demonomicon
of Iggwilv and other sources, oozes are scattered
fragments or offspring of the demon lord Juiblex.
Whether this is true or not, the Faceless Lord is one
of the few beings that can control oozes and imbue
them with a modicum of intelligence. Most of the time,
oozes have no sense of tactics or self-preservation.
They are direct and predictable, attacking and eating
without cunning. Under the control ofjuiblex, they
exhibit glimmers of sentience and malevolent intent.
Ooze Nature. An ooze doesn't require sleep.


Variant: Psychic Cray Ooze
A gray ooze that lives a long time can evolve to become
more intelligent and develop limited psionic ability. Such
occurrences are more common in gray oozes that live near
psionic creatures such as mind flayers, suggesting that the
ooze can sense and mimic psionic ability.
A psionic gray ooze has an Intelligence score of 6 (-2), as
well as the following additional action.
Psychic Crush (Recharge 5-6). The ooze targets one
creature that it can sense within 60 feet of it. The target must
make a DC 10 Intelligence saving throw, taking 10 (3d6)
psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one.


f^WWBta
•j-r^fl*
-*u~
, A black pudding reseplbles a heaving mound of sticky
black sludge. In dim passageways, the pudding appears
to be little more than a blot of shadow.
Flesh, wood, metal, and bone dissolve when the
pudding ebbs over them. Stone remains behind,
wiped clean.
Gelatinous Cube
Gelatinous cubes scour dungeon passages in silent,
predictable patterns, leaving perfectly clean paths in
their wake. They consume living tissue while leaving
bones and other materials undissolved.
A gelatinous cube is all but transparent, making
it hard to spot until it attacks. A cube that is well
fed can be easier to spot, since its victims' bones,
coins, and other objects can be seen suspended
inside the creature.
Gray Ooze
A gray ooze is stone turned to liquid by
chaos. When it moves, it slithers
like a liquid snake, rising to strike.
©dW^E Jelly
Ochre jellies are yellowish blobs that can
slide under doors and through narrow
cracks in pursuit of creatures to devour.
They have enough bestial cunning to
avoid large groups of enemies.
An ochre jelly follows at a safe distance
as it pursues its meal. Itg digestive enzymes
dissolve flesh quickly but have no effect on other
substances such as bone, wood, and metal.
Black Pudding
f,c?rge ooze, unaligned
Armor Class 7
Hit Points 85 (10dl0 + 30)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)       5 (-3)       16 (+3)       1 (-5)       6 (-2)        1 (-5)
Damage Immunities acid, cold, lightning, slashing
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
|     frightened, prone
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 8
I Languages —
, Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
, Amorphous. The pudding can move through a space as narrow
1 as 1 inch wide without squeezing.
Corrosive Form. A creature that touches the pudding or hits it
j with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 4 (ld8) acid
; damage. Any nonmagical weapon made of metal or wood that
[ hits the pudding corrodes. After dealing damage, the weapon
r-ii-■**!-' atgJa~i'iii»-|:.»----j,->e'»                                 --     L   ■     ■'■jjhu!w*»^ .                                    ■  ■   -^g-^j■ i^
takes a permanent and cumulative ^l\ penalty to damage foils.
If its penalty dfops to -5, the weapon is destroyed. Nonmagical
ammunition made of metal or wood that hits the pudding is
destroyed after dealing damage.
The pudding can eat through 2-inch-thick, nonmagical wood
or metal in 1 round.
Spider Climb. The pudding can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
ActionsI
Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6+ 3) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8) acid  I
damage. In addition, nonmagical armor worn by the target
is partly dissolved and takes a permanent and cumulative -1
penalty to the AC it offers. The armor is destroyed if the penalty |
reduces its AC to 10.
Reactions____________________________
Split. When a pudding that is Medium or larger is subjected to
lightning or slashing damage, it splits into two new puddings    J
if it has at least 10 hit points. Each new pudding has hit points
equal to half the original pudding's, rounded down. New
puddings are one size smaller than the original pudding.
*^«*-=**-
S3EI


241
^1L
Tn^
1
uOOR*
WERE !
-ruE oo^oEoM'5"-          rSt p.0*.           ^a""-1"'
SHoouo^vt:rJoU«^oFr;^^^ot
HIS F'«ST E
OM

*
Gelatinous Cube
Large ooze, unaligned
Armor Class 6
Hit Points 84 (8dl0 + 40)
Speed 15 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)       3 (-4)      20 (+5)       l(-5)       6 (-2)        1 (-5)
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, prone
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Ooze Cube. The cube takes up its entire space. Other creatures
can enter the space, but a creature that does so is subjected to
the cube's Engulf and has disadvantage on the saving throw.
Creatures inside the cube can be seen but have total cover.
A creature within 5 feet of the cube can take an action to
pull a creature or object out of the cube. Doing so requires a
successful DC 12 Strength check, and the creature making the
attempt takes 10 (3d6) acid damage.
The cube can hold only one Large creature or up to four
Medium or smaller creatures inside it at a time.
Transparent. Even when the cube-is in piairt sight, it takes a
successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) chjsckto spot a'ctfbe,
that has neither moved nor attacked. A creature that tries to
enter the cube's space while unaware of the cube is surprised
by the cube.
Actions
Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) acid damage.
Engulf. The cube moves up to its speed. While doing so, it can
enter Large or smaller creatures' spaces. Whenever the cube
enters a creature's space, the creature must make a DC 12
Dexterity saving throw.
On a successful save, the creature can choose to be pushed 5
feet back or to the side of the cube. A creature that chooses not
to be pushed suffers the consequences of a failed saving throw.
On a failed save, the cube enters the creature's space, and
the creature takes 10 (3d6) acid damage and is engulfed. The
engulfed creature can't breathe, is restrained, and takes 21
(6d6) acid damage at the start of each of the cube's turns.
When the cube moves, the engulfed creature moves with it.
An engulfed creature can try to escape by taking an action
to make a DC 12 Strength check. On a success, the creature
escapes and enters a space of its choice within 5 feet
of the cube.

$M
s
Armor Class 8
Hit Points 22 (3d8 + 9)
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       6 (-2)       16 (+3)       l(-5)       6 (-2)        2 (-4)
Skills Stealth +2
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, prone
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 1/2(100 XP)
Amorphous. The ooze can move through a space as narrow as
1 inch wide without squeezing.
Corrode Metal. Any nonmagical weapon made of metal that
hits the ooze corrodes. After dealing damage, the weapon
takes a permanent and cumulative -1 penalty to damage rolls.
If its penalty drops to -5, the weapon is destroyed. Nonmagical
ammunition made of metal that hits the ooze is destroyed after
dealing damage.
The ooze can eat through 2-inch-thick, nonmagical metal
in 1 round.
Fake Appearance. While the ooze remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from an oily pool or wet rock.
Oghk,eJelly
Large ooze, unaligned
Armor Class 8
Hit Points 45 (6dl0 +12)
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft.
STR
15 (+2)
DEX
6 (-2)
CON
14 (+2)
INT
2 (-4)
WIS
6 (-2)
CHA
l(-5)
I
Actions
Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6)
acid damage, and if the target is wearing nonmagical metal
armor, its armor is partly corroded and takes a permanent
and cumulative -1 penalty to the AC it offers. The armor is
destroyed if the penalty reduces its AC to 10.
Damage Resistances acid
Damage Immunities lightning, slashing
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, prone
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Amorphous. The jelly can move through a space as narrow as 1
inch wide without squeezing.
Spider Climb. The jelly can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (ld6)
acid damage.
Reactions
-1- -mj"
Split. When a jelly that is Medium or larger is subjected to
lightning or slashing damage, it splits into two new jellies if it
has at least 10 hit points. Each new jelly has hit points equal to
. half the original jelly's, rounded down. New jellies are one size
smaller than the original jelly.
^f.-^itf": aiJFWmtpjraS^
A

^mm
24?
Orgs  ;
Ores are savage raiders and pillagers with stooped
postures, low foreheads, and piggish faces with
prominent lower canines that resemble tusks.
Gruumsh One-Eye. Ores worship Gruumsh, the
mightiest of the ore deities and their creator. The ores
believe that in ancient days, the gods gathered to divide
the world among their followers. When Gruumsh
claimed the mountains, he learned they had been taken
by the dwarves. He laid claim to the forests, but those
had been settled by the elves. Each place that Gruumsh
wanted had already been claimed. The other gods
laughed at Gruumsh, but he responded with a furious
bellow. Grasping his mighty spear, he laid waste to the
mountains, set the forests aflame, and carved great
furrows in the fields. Such was the role of the ores, he
proclaimed, to take and destroy all that the other races
would deny them. To this day, the ores wage an endless
war on humans, elves, dwarves, and other folk.
Ores hold a particular hatred for elves. The elven god
Corellon Larethian half-blinded Gruumsh with a well-
placed arrow to the ore god's eye. Since then, the ores
have taken particular joy in slaughtering elves. Turning
his injury into a baleful gift, Gruumsh grants divine
might to any champion who willingly plucks out one of
its eyes in his honor.
Tribes like Plagues. Ores gather in tribes that
exert their dominance and satisfy their bloodlust by
plundering villages, devouring or driving off roaming
herds, and slaying any humanoids that stand against
them. After savaging a settlement, ores pick it clean of
wealth and items usable in their own lands. They set
the remains of villages and camps ablaze, then retreat
whence they came, their bloodlust satisfied.
Ranging Scavengers. Their lust for slaughter
demands that ores dwell always within striking
distance of new targets. As such, they seldom settle
permanently, instead converting ruins, cavern
complexes, and defeated foes' villages into fortified
camps and strongholds. Ores build only for defense,
making no innovation or improvement to their lairs
beyond mounting the severed body parts of their victims
on spiked stockade walls or pikes jutting up from moats
and trenches.
When an existing territory is depleted of food, an ore
tribe divides into roving bands that scout for choice
hunting grounds. When each party returns, it brings
back trophies and news of targets ripe for attack, the
richest of which is chosen. The tribe then sets out en
masse to carve a bloody path to its new territory.
On rare occasions, a tribe's leader chooses to hold
onto a particularly defensible lair for decades. The ores
of such a tribe must range far across the countryside to
sate their appetites.
Leadership and Might. Ore tribes are mostly
patriarchal, flaunting such vivid or grotesque titles
as Many-Arrows, Screaming Eye, and Elf Ripper.
Occasionally, a powerful war chief unites scattered
ore tribes into a single rampaging horde, which
runs roughshod over other ore tribes and humanoid
settlements from a position of overwhelming strength.
length and power are the greatest of orcish virtues,
ahd ores embrace all manner of mighty creatures in
their tribes. Rejecting notions of racial purity, they
proudly welcome ogres, trolls, half-ores, and orogs into
their ranks. As well, ores respect and fear the size and
power of evil giants, and often serve them as guards
and soldiers.
Ore Crossbreeds. Luthic, the ore goddess of fertility
and wife of Gruumsh, demands that ores procreate often
and indiscriminately so that ore hordes swell generation
after generation. The ores' drive to reproduce runs
stronger than any other humanoid race, and they readily
crossbreed with other races. When an ore procreates
with a non-ore humanoid of similar size and stature
(such as a human or a dwarf), the resulting child is
either an ore or a half-ore. When an ore produces young
with an ogre, the child is a half-ogre of intimidating
strength and brutish features called an ogrillon.
Orc War Chief__________________
The war chief of an orc tribe is its strongest and most
cunning member. The reign of a war chief lasts only as
long as it commands the fear and respect of other tribe
members, whose bloodlust must be regularly satisfied
lest the chief appear weak.
Scions of Slaughter. Gruumsh bestows special
blessings upon war chiefs who prove themselves in
battle time and again, imbuing them with slivers of his
savagery. A war chief so blessed finds that his weapons
cut deeper into his enemies, allowing him to inflict
more carnage.
Kinc Obould Many-Arrows
King Obould of the Many-Arrows tribe is a legend among the
■ orc war chiefs of the Forgotten Realms, and he is the most
famous orc chief in the history of the D&D game.
Smarter and more intuitive than most of his kind, Obould
slew his chieftain to take control of his tribe. Skilled in the
arts of war and renowned for his violent temper, Obould
proved himself a fierce opponent in battle time and again.
Over the years, he subsumed other orc tribes into his own,
until he commanded a horde of thousands.
Obould leveraged his strength and influence to carve out
a kingdom for himself in the Spine of the World, a mountain
range overlooking numerous dwarven, human, and elven
strongholds.
After years of bloody conflict with his more civilized
neighbors, Obould did the unthinkable and brokered a
peace treaty with his enemies. This treaty confused many
: of the ores under Obould's command. It was either a clever
ploy by Obould to buy time while he strengthened his army
for a final, decisive sweep across the Savage Frontier, or it
was a troubling sign that Obould had forsaken the ways of
I Gruumsh and needed to be destroyed.
Orc Eye of Gruumsh
*i.^.;^fr.Jl
When an orc slays an elf in Gruumsh's name antl dffer§
the corpse of its foe as a sacrifice to the god of slaughter,
an aspect of the god might appear. This aspect demands
an additional sacrifice: one of the ore's eyes, symbolizing
the loss Gruumsh suffered at the hands of his greatest
enemy, Corellon Larethian.
If the orc plucks out one of its eyes, Gruumsh might
grant the orc spellcasting ability and special favoiValong
with the right to call itself an Eye of Gruumsh. When
not using their auguries to advise their war chiefs, these
savage devotees of the god of slaughter hurl thefhsfelves
into battle, their weapons stained with blood.
Orog
Orogs are ores blessed with a surprisingly keen intellect
that ordinary ores believe is a gift from the orc goddess
Luthic. Like Luthic, orogs prefer to live underground,
although the scarcity of food often brings them to
the surface to hunt. Ores respect an orog's strength
and cunning, and a lone orog might command an
orc war band.
Stronger and Smarter. An orog uses its strength to
bully other ores and its intelligence to surprise enemies
on the battlefield. Many an overconfident elf, human, or
dwarf commander has watched a "simple" orc warlord
execute a clever maneuver to outflank and destroy an
opposing force, not realizing the orc is an orog.
When encountered in great numbers, orogs form their
own detachments within much larger orc hordes, and
they are always at the forefront of any attack, relying on
their superior strength and tactical insight to overcome
anything that stands in their way.
Few orc tribes actively seek out orogs to bolster their
ranks. The orogs' superiority makes them ideal leaders,
and thus deadly rivals to orc war chiefs, who must be
wary of orog treachery.
Detached Killers. Wanting nothing more than to hack
their enemies to pieces, orogs are a terrifying presence
on the battlefield. They form no attachments, even to
their parents and siblings, and have no concept of love
or dedication. They worship the orc pantheon of gods—
Gruumsh and Luthic foremost—because they believe
that the gods have strength beyond reason, and physical
might is all they respect.
Servants of Darkness. Mistrusted by ores, some
orogs form independent mercenary war bands that
sell themselves to the highest bidder. As long as they
are rewarded, orog mercenaries gladly serve as elite
warriors and shock troops for evil wizards, depraved
giants, and other villains.
He ^ortEP *; -JU*^* ofZo^ »*?£*»or*T"
4,
34S;
Org
Medium humanoid (ore), chaotic evil
Armor Class 13 (hide armor)
I Hit Points 15 (2d8 +6)
Speed 30 ft.


Org War Chief
Medium humanoid (ore), chaotic evif
Armor Class 16 (chain mail)
Hit Points 93 (lld8 + 44)
Speed 30 ft.

STR            DEX          CON
18 (+4)      12 (+1)      18 (+4)
INT           WIS
11 (+0)     11 (+0)
CHA
16 (+3)
^
ff———-
STR            DEX          CON            INT           WIS           CHA
16 (+3)       12 (+1)      16 (+3)       7 (-2)      11 (+0)      10 (+0)
i^^"™                                                        -
! Skills Intimidation +2
| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Ore
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Aggressive. As a bonus action, the ore can move up to its speed
| toward a hostile creature that it can see.
I Actions
Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
1 target. Hit: 9 (ldl2 + 3) slashing damage.
Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Saving Throws Str +6, Con +6, Wis +2
Skills Intimidation +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Ore
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Aggressive. As a bonus action, the ore can move up to its speed
toward a hostile creature that it can see.
Gruumsh's Fury. The ore deals an extra 4 (ld8) damage when it
hits with a weapon attack (included in the attacks).
Actions

Multiattack. The ore makes two attacks with its greataxe or
its spear.
Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 14 (ldl2 + 4 plus ld8) slashing damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 12 (ld6 + 4 plus ld8) piercing
damage, or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two
hands to make a melee attack.
Battle Cry (1/Day). Each creature of the war chief's choice that
is within 30 feet of it, can hear it, and not already affected by
Battle Cry gain advantage on attack rolls until the start of the
. war chiefs next turn. The war chief can then make one attack
as a bonus action.
f-                                                       -                           ■-                     -
34.6
QJRCS,


/

Typkjal Orog
Org Eye of Gruumsh
Medium human'oid (ore), chaotic evil
Armor Class 16 (ring mail, shield)
Hit Points 45 (6d8+ 18)
Speed 30 ft.
-      •    ■                        ■                            -'---J?
STR          DEX         CON
16 (+3)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
9 (-1)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)
Skills Intimidation +3, Religion +1
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common, Ore
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Aggressive. As a bonus action, the ore can move up to its speed
toward a hostile creature that it can see.
Cruumsh's Fury. The ore deals an extra 4 (ld8) damage when it
hits with a weapon attack (included in the attack).
Spellcasting. The ore is a 3rd-level spellcaster. Its spellcasting
ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11, +3 to hit with spell attacks).
J The ore has the following cleric spells prepared:
Cantrips (at-will): guidance, resistance, thaumaturge
1st level (4 slots): bless, command
2nd level (2 slots): augury, spiritual weapon (spear)
Actions_____________________________
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (ld6 + 3 plus ld8) piercing
I damage, or 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage if used with two
hands to make a melee attack.
Orog
Medium humanoid (ore), chaotic evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 42 (5d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      12 (+1)      18 (+4)      12 (+1)     11 (+0)      12 (+1)
Skills Intimidation +5, Survival +2
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Ore
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orog can move up to its
speed toward a hostile creature that it can see.
Actions
Multiattack. The orog makes two greataxe attacks.
| Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
] target. Hit: 10 (ldl2 + 4) slashing damage.
i Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage.
.. ■■^j-jjiji jg.ua

*i
■%*
^
247
___
An otyugh is a grotesque, bulbous creature borne along
on three sturdy legs, its eyes and nose set along a vine-
like stalk that snakes from the top of its bloated body.
, Two rubbery tentacles end in spiky, leaf-like appendages
that the otyugh uses to shovel food into its gaping maw.
An otyugh buries itself under mounds of offal and
carrion, leaving only its sensory stalk exposed. When an
Jqdible creature happens by, the otyugh's tentacles erupt
r-ff om the filth and grab hold of it.
Otyughs make the most of any opportunity to ambush
and devour prey. They use a limited form of telepathy to
urge sentient creatures toward their lairs, sometimes by
pretending to be something else.
Dwellers in Darkness. Otyughs tolerate bright light
only when considerable stores of carrion or garbage lie
within reach. In the wilderness, they dwell in stagnant
swamps, scum-filled ponds, and damp forest dells.
The scent of graveyards, city sewers, village middens,
and manure-filled animal pens attracts them to
civilized areas.
Since otyughs lack concern for anything but food,
their nests sometimes accumulate a variety of treasures
shed from their victims and mixed among the junk.
Symbiotic Guardians. Sentient subterranean beings
can coexist with otyughs, employing them as garbage
disposals. With such plentiful sustenance, otyughs
grow fat in their wallows, unmoved by any other drive
or desire. This sedentary gluttony makes them reliable
guardians. As long as it is fed, an otyugh refrains from
attacking other creatures. However, would-be otyugh
masters can easily underestimate the quantity of waste,
carrion, and meat necessary to keep an otyugh from
wandering off in search of food. More than one "trained"
otyugh has eaten its keeper after devouring all the waste
in its wallow.
Saving Throws Con +7
\ Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Otyugh
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Limited Telepathy. The otyugh can magically transmit simple
messages and images to any creature within 120 feet of it that
I can understand a language. This form of telepathy doesn't
I allow the receiving creature to telepathically respond.
Actions
Multiattack. The otyugh makes three attacks: one with its bite
I and two with its tentacles.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw against disease
or become poisoned until the disease is cured. Every 24 hours
that elapse, the target must repeat the saving throw, reducing
its hit point maximum by 5 (ldlO) on a failure. The disease is
I cured on a success. The target dies if the disease reduces its
hit point maximum to 0. This reduction to the target's hit point
J maximum lasts until the disease is cured.
J Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 4 (ld8)
piercing damage. If the target is Medium or smaller, it is
grappled (escape DC 13) and restrained until the grapple
ends. The otyugh has two tentacles, each of which can grapple
I one target.
Tentacle Slam. The otyugh slams creatures grappled by it into
each other or a solid surface. Each creature must succeed on a
J DC 14 Strength saving throw or take 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning
damage and be stunned until the end of the otyugh's next turn.
On a successful save, the target takes half the bludgeoning
I damage and isn't stunned.
'                                      -                           ,-..■-■■                  i


mm
01VXBEAR
An owlbear's screech echoes through dark valleys and
benighted forests, piercing the quiet night to announce
the death of its prey. Feathers cover the thjck, shaggy
coat of its bearlike body, and the limpid pupils of its
great round eyes stare furiously from its owlish head.
Deadly Ferocity. The owlbear's reputation for ferocity,
aggression, stubbornness, and sheer ill temper makes
it one of the most feared predators of the wild. There
is little, if anything, that a hungry owlbear fears. Even
monsters that outmatch an owlbear in size and strength
avoid tangling with it, for this creature cares nothing
about a foe's superior strength as it attacks without
provocation.
Consummate Predators. An owlbear emerges
frpm its den around sunset and hunts into the darkest
hours of the night, hooting or screeching to declare its
territory, to search for a mate, or to flush prey into its
hunting grounds. These are typically forests familiar
to the owlbear, and dense enough to limit its quarry's
escape routes.
An owlbear makes its den in a cave or ruin littered
with the bones of its prey. It drags partially devoured
kills back to its den, storing portions of the carcass
among the surrounding rocks, bushes, and trees.
The spent of blood and rotting flesh hangs heavy
near an owlbear's lair, attracting scavengers and thus
luring more prey,
Owlbears hunt alone or in mated pairs. If quarry is
plentiful, a family of owlbears might remain together
for longer than'is required to rear offspring. Otherwise,
they part ways as soon as the young are ready to hunt.
Savage Companions. Although they are more
intelligent than most animals, owlbears are difficult to
tame. However, with enough time, food, and luck, an
intelligent creature can train an owlbear to recognize it
as a master, making it an unflinching guard or a fast and
hardy mount. People of remote frontier settlements have
even succeeded at racing owlbears, but spectators bet as
often on which owlbear will attack its handler as they do
on which will reach the finish line first.
Elven communities encourage owlbears to den
beneath their treetop villages, using the beasts as a
natural defense during the night. Hobgoblins favor
owlbears as war beasts, and hill giants and frost
giants sometimes keep owlbears as pets. A starved
owlbear might show up in a gladiatorial arena,
ruthlessly eviscerating and devouring its foes before a
bloodthirsty audience.
Owlbear Origins. Scholars have long debated the
origins of the owlbear. The most common theory is
that a demented wizard created the first specimen by
crossing a giant owl with a bear. However, venerable
elves claim to have known these creatures for thousands
of years, and some fey insist that owlbears have always
existed in the Feywild.
pR0BM>LV OE»0       ..SHjbAV.NSHADOW. GNOME
PwrWMB 0F T"    MorGRaYe Un.vers.tv
Owlbear
Large montfrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 59 (7dt0 + 21)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)      12 (+1)      17 (+3)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Keen Sight and Smell. The owlbear has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The owlbear makes two attacks: one with its beak
and one with its claws.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 10 (ldlO + 5) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage.
249

Pegasus
,  ■                :zz:
Pegasus
Large celestial, chaotic good
^fc**J-!MM-JM^
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 59 (7dl0 + 21)
I Speed 60 ft., fly 90 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)     16 (+3)      10 (+0)     15 (+2)      13 (+1)
. Saving Throws Dex +4, Wis +4, Cha +3
I Skills Perception +6
' Senses passive Perception 16
Languages understands Celestial, Common, Elvish, and Sylvan
but can't speak
■i Challenge 2 (450 XP)
j Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
-.t-^,-..-^-.   -~     ^^..TTJI"
The white winged horses known as pegasi soar
through the skies, a vision of grace and majesty. When
they touch down on solid ground, they linger only
for a moment, drinking from mountain springs and
pristine lakes. Any sound or sign of another creature
startles them, sending them off to fly once more
among the clouds.
Noble Mounts. Pegasi are highly prized as swift and
reliable steeds, being faster and less temperamental
than griffons, hippogriffs, and wyverns. However, these
wild and shy creatures are as intelligent as humanoids,
and so can't be traditionally broken and tamed. A
pegasus must be persuaded to serve a good-aligned
creature as a mount, but when it does so, it forges a life-
long bond with its new companion.
Born of the Planes. Pegasi trace their origins to the
Olympian Glades of Arborea, where they soar through
the skies of that plane and serve as faithful mounts to
the Seldarine, the pantheon of elven gods. These gods
have been known to send pegasi to the Material Plane to
aid those in need.
Pegasi Nests. Pegasi mate for life, build their nests in
hard-to-reach locations, and give birth to live young.
,' sftaApos
Peryton
Although this monstrous carnivore feeds on
any creature, it prefers humanoids, especially
elves, half-elves, and humans. When it kills a
humanoid, a peryton rips out its prey's heart and
takes it back to its nest to be devoured.
The peryton is a bizarre creature that blends the
body and wings of a bird of prey with the head of a
stag. Its strangest feature is its shadow, which appears
humanoid rather than reflecting the creature's physical
form. Sages postulate that the first perytons were
humans transformed by a hideous curse or magical
experiment, but bards tell a different tale of a man
whose infidelity caused his scorned wife to cut out the
heart of her younger, more beautiful rival and consume
it in a ritual intended to forever win her husband's
heart. The ritual succeeded until the woman's villainy
was exposed. She was hanged for her crime, but the
lingering magic of her foul ritual caused the carrion
birds that feasted on her corpse to transform into the
first perytons.
Unnatural Hunger. A pery ton's reproductive cycle
depends on the heart of a freshly killed humanoid. The
organ must be consumed by a female peryton before
she can reproduce. When a peryton consumes a heart,
its shadow changes for a brief time to reflect its true
monstrous form.
When attacking a humanoid, a peryton is single-
minded and relentless, fighting until it or its prey dies.
If a peryton is somehow driven away, it stalks lost prey
from afar, attacking again when the opportunity arises.
Bane of the Mountains. Perytons roost atop
mountain ridges and lair in high caves. They prey on
creatures living or wandering in the vales below, and
travelers on lonely mountain roads learn to keep a
wary eye on the sky. Because normal weapons are less
effective against perytons, the folk of the mountains
know to avoid confrontations with these monsters
at all costs.
Established settlements are attractive to perytons
as a renewable food source. As such, village councils
and local nobles often hire adventurers to eliminate
'peryton nests.
Perytqn
Medium monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 13. (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 20 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX
12 (+1)
CON
13 (+1)
INT
9(-l)
WIS
12 (+1)
CHA
10 (+0)
/
Skills Perception +5
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages understands Common and Elvish but can't speak
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Dive Attack. If the peryton is flying and dives at least 30 feet
straight toward a target and then hits it with a melee weapon
attack, the attack deals an extra 9 (2d8) damage to the target.
Flyby. The peryton doesn't provoke an opportunity attack when
it flies out of an enemy's reach.
Keen Sight and Smell. The peryton has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The peryton makes one gore attack and one
talon attack.
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) piercing damage.
-     ■•       ■       ■■''
CKKY ■
•x  w
Piercer
Medium monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (3d8 + 9)
Speed 5 ft., climb 5 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      13 (+1)      16 (+3)       1 (-5)       7 (-2)       3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +5
I Senses blindsight 30 ft, darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
I Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
False Appearance. While the piercer remains motionless on the
j ceiling, it is indistinguishable from a normal stalactite.
I Spider Climb. The piercer can climb difficult surfaces,
I including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
| ability check.
Actions
Drop. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, one creature directly
underneath the piercer. Hit: 3 (ld6) piercing damage per 10
, feet fallen, up to 21 (6d6). Miss: The piercer takes half the
normal falling damage for the distance fallen.
Piercer
Clinging to the ceilings of caverns and large
subterranean passages, piercers blend in perfectly with
natural rock, dropping in silence to impale unsuspecting
foes on the ground below.
A piercer is the larval form of a roper, and the two
creatures often attack in tandem. A rock-like shell
encases a piercer's body, giving it the look and texture
of a stalactite. That shell protects a soft, slug-like upper
body that lets the piercer move across cavern walls
and ceilings to position itself for prey. With its eye and
mouth closed, the piercer is difficult to distinguish from
ordinary rock formations.
Patient Hunters. Piercers can see, but they can also
respond to noise and heat, waiting for living creatures to
pass beneath them, then falling to attack. A piercer that
misses its chance to kill must make its slow way back
to the ceiling. A fallen piercer excretes a foul-smelling
slime when attacked, making most predators think
twice about eating it.
Piercers gather in colonies to maximize the
effectiveness of their attacks, dropping simultaneously
to increase the odds of striking prey. After a piercer
successfully slays a creature, the others slowly creep
toward the corpse to join in the feast.
46,             "Si
i
"Pg^ GOWNs
p,x,e^H10N1STA
Pixie
Standing barely a foot tall, pixies resemble
diminutive elves with gossamer wings like
those of dragonflies or butterflies, bright as the
clear dawn and as luminous as the full moonrise.
Curious as cats and shy as deer, pixies go where
they please. They like to spy on other creatures
and can barely contain their excitement around
them. The urge to introduce themselves and
Strike up a friendship is almost overwhelming;
only a pixie's fear of being captured or attacked
stays its hand. Those who wander through a
pixie's glade might never see the creatures, yet
hear the occasional giggle, gasp, or sigh.
Pixies array themselves like princes and
princesses of the fey, wearing flowing
gowns and doublets of silk that sparkle
like moonlight on a pond. Some dress
in acorns, leaves, bark, and the pelts of
tiny woodland beasts. They take great pride
in their regalia and beam with joy when they are
complimented on their ensembles.
Magical Faerie Folk. With their innate power of
invisibility, pixies rarely appear unless they wish to be
seen. In the Feywild and on the Material Plane, pixies
etch patterns of frost on winter ponds and rouse the
buds in springtime. They cause flowers to sparkle with
summer dew, and color the leaves with the blazing
hues of autumn.
Pixie Dust. When pixies fly visibly, a shower of
sparkling dust follows in their wake like the glittering
tail of a shooting star. A mere sprinkle of pixie dust is
said to be able to grant the power of flight, confuse a
creature hopelessly, or send foes into a magical slumber.
Only pixies can use their dust to its full potential,
but these fey are constantly sought out by mages and
monsters seeking to study or master their power.
Tiny Tricksters. While the arrival of visitors piques
their curiosity, pixies are too shy to reveal themselves
at first. They study the visitors from afar to gauge
their temperament or play harmless tricks on them to
measure their reactions. For example, pixies might
tie a dwarf's boots together, create illusions of strange
creatures or treasures, or use dancing lights to lead
interlopers astray. If the visitors respond with hostility,
the pixies give them a wide berth. If the visitors are
good natured, the pixies are likely to be emboldened
and more friendly. The fey might even emerge and offer
to guide their "guests" along a safe route or invite them
to a tiny yet satisfying feast prepared in their honor.
Opposed to Violence. Unlike their fey cousins, the
sprites, pixies abhor weapons and would sooner flee
than get into a physical altercation with any enemy.
■    ■    ■      ■        ■■-■BBBI
Pixie
Tiny fey, neutral good
Armor Class 15
Hit Points! (Id4-1)
Speed 10 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)      20 (+5)      8{-l)       10 (+0)     14 (+2)      15 (+2)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +7
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Sylvan
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Magic Resistance. The pixie has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Innate Spellcasting. The pixie's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following
spells, requiring only its pixie dust as a component:
At will: druidcraft
1/day each: confusion, dancing lights, detect evil and good,
detect thoughts, dispel magic, entangle, fly, phantasmal force,
polymorph, sleep
Actions
Superior Invisibility. The pixie magically turns invisible until
its concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). Any
equipment the pixie wears or carries is invisible with it.
y
*53
•>
PSEUDODRAGON
The elusive pseudodragon dwells in the quiet places of
the world, making its home in the hollows of trees and
small caves. With its red-brown scales, horns, and a
maw filled with sharp teeth, a pseudodragon resembles
a tiny red dragon but its disposition is playful.
Quiet and Defensive. Pseudodragons have little
interest in other creatures, and they avoid them
whenever possible. If it is attacked, a pseudodragon
•.fights back using the poisonous stinger at the tip of its
tail, one jab of which can put a creature into a catatonic
state that can last for hours.
Draconic Familiars. Mages often seek out
pseudodragons, whose agreeable disposition, telepathic
ability, and resistance to magic make them superior
familiars. Pseudodragons are selective when it comes
to choosing companions, but they can sometimes
be won over with gifts of food or treasure. When
a pseudodragon finds an agreeable companion, it
bonds with that person as long as it is treated fairly.
Apseudodragon puts up with no ill treatment, and
it abandons a manipulative or abusive companion
without warning.
254
s
Language of Emotion. Pseudodragons can't speak,
but they communicate using a limited form of telepathy
that allows them to share basic ideas such as hunger,
curiosity, or affection. When it bonds with a companion,
a pseudodragon can communicate what it sees and
hears even over long distances.
A pseudodragon often vocalizes animal noises. A
rasping purr indicates pleasure, while a hiss means
unpleasant surprise. A bird-like chirping represents
desire, and a growl always means anger or discontent.
^____________________________________________________________________________fat
Variant: Pseudodragon Familiar
Some pseudodragons are willing to serve spellcasters as a
familiar. Such pseudodragons have the following trait.
Familiar. The pseudodragon can serve another creature as
a familiar, forming a magic, telepathic bond with that willing
companion. While the two are bonded, the companion
can sense what the pseudodragon senses as long as they
are within 1 mile of each other. While the pseudodragon is
within 10 feet of its companion, the companion shares the
pseudodragon's Magic Resistance trait. At anytime and
for any reason, the pseudodragon can end its service as a
familiar, ending the telepathic bond.
Pseudodragon
Tiny dragon, neutral good
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 7 (2d4 + 2)
Speed 15 ft, fly 60 ft.


STR
6 (-2)
DEX         CON
15 (+2)      13 (+1)
INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)     12 (+1)      10 (+0)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages understands Common and Draconic but
can't speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Senses. The pseudodragon has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight, hearing, or smell.
Magic Resistance. The pseudodragon has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Limited Telepathy. The pseudodragon can magically
communicate simple ideas, emotions, and images
telepathtcally with any creature within 100 feet of it that can
understand a language.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned for
1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target falls
unconscious for the same duration, or until it takes damage or
another creature uses an action to shake it awake.
PSKJJDODRAGON
\
Purple Worm
The massive burrowing monster known as the purple
worm terrorizes the creatures of the Underdark as
it chews through solid rock in pursuit of prey. A dim-
witted, ravenous force of nature, this creature regards
anything it encounters as food.
Ravenous Hunters. Loud noise attracts purple
worms, which have been known to interrupt
underground battles and tear through subterranean
cities seeking prey. The underground civilizations of the
drow, the duergar, and the mind flayers maintain special
wards around their settlements to deter these monsters.
Though most common in the Underdark, purple
worms are frequently seen on the surface world in rocky
and mountainous lands. The maw of a purple worm is
large enough to swallow a horse whole, and no creature
is safe from its hunger. It lunges forward by rhythmically
compressing and expanding its body, catching other
Underdark dwellers by surprise with the speed of
its advance.
Boons of the Worm. When a purple worm burrows
through the ground, it consumes earth and rock, which
it breaks down and constantly excretes. Precious metals
and gems can thus be found within the bodies of purple
worms, which are targeted by particularly brave and
foolhardy treasure hunters.
A burrowing purple worm constantly creates new
tunnels throughout the Underdark, which are quickly
made use of by other creatures as corridors and
highways. Because a purple worm rarely returns to
its own tunnels, such passageways are a good place to
avoid these monsters. Areas rich in prey quickly become
interlaced with complex tunnel systems resulting from
several worms, hunting together.
-a
{*<*.
Purple Worm
Gargantuan Ynohsttoshy, unaligned
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 247 (15d20 +90)
Speed 50 ft., burrow 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
28 (+9)       7 (-2)      22 (+6)       1 (-5)       8 (-1)       4 (-3)
Saving Throws Con +11, Wis +4
Senses blindsight 30 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP)
Tunneler. The worm can burrow through solid rock at half its
burrow speed and leaves a 10-foot-diameter tunnel in its wake.
Actions
Multiattack. The worm makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its stinger.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3d8 + 9) piercing damage. If the target is a Large or
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 19 Dexterity saving
throw or be swallowed by the worm. A swallowed creature is
blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks and
other effects outside the worm, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid
damage at the start of each of the worm's turns.
If the worm takes 30 damage or more on a single turn
from a creature inside it, the worm must succeed on a DC 21
Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate
all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10
feet of the worm. If the worm dies, a swallowed creature is no
longer restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using
20 feet of movement, exiting prone.
Tail Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 19 (3d6 + 9) piercing damage, and the target
must make a DC 19 Constitution saving throw, taking 42 (12d6)
poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
'--   " - ' "-u ■- ■ — w-v.m..v-   —
^ j -^ ,'..^a^iy,».w»a
}w^&mm
"^Vff
355
QUAGGOTH
Medium hUmanoid (quaggoth), chaotic neutral
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6d8+18)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)       6 (-2)      12 (+1)      7 (-2)
Skills Athletics +5
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Undercommon
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Wounded Fury. While it has 10 hit points or fewer, the
quaggoth has advantage on attack rolls. In addition, it deals an   I
extra 7 (2d6) damage to any target it hits with a melee attack.
Actions|
Multiattack. The quaggoth makes two claw attacks.
|
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Quaggoth
Savage and territorial, quaggoths climb the chasms
of the Underdark. They maul their foes in a frenzy,
becoming even more murderous in the face of death.
Quaggoth Origins. Quaggoths were never an
enlightened species, but they were not always the brutal
Underdark denizens they are today. In a distant age,
quaggoth tribes dwelled upon the surface as nocturnal
arboreal hunters, possessing their own language and
culture. When elves appeared in the mortal realm, they
clashed with the quaggoths, eventually driving them to
near extinction. Only by fleeing deep into the Underdark
did the quaggoths survive.
As they passed the ages deep beneath the world, the
quaggoths' fur lost its color and their vision adapted to
the darkness, even as the constant danger and weird
magic of their new realm transformed them. Turning
increasingly brutal and savage, they ate whatever food
they could find—and when they could not find it, they
preyed on each other. As cannibalism became part of
their culture, their past was abandoned.
Servants of the Drow. The ancient enmity between
quaggoths and surface elves makes them easy converts
to the dark elf cause. In recent years, the drow have
taken an interest in breeding quaggoths, encouraging
their ferocity while strengthening their obedience.
Wealthy drow houses have legions of quaggoths at
their command. Even worse, the drow cultivate the
quaggoths' hatred of the elves by leading them on
surface raids against known elven enclaves.
Thonots. Some quaggoths absorb psionic energy that
suffuses certain parts of the Underdark. When a tribe
discovers that one of its own has inherited such powers,
they press it into the role of tribal shaman, or thonot.
A thonot keep a tribe's lore and ensures its superiority
against enemies. A thonot that fails the tribe is slain and
devoured in a cannibalistic ritual, in the hope that its
power passes to another more worthy quaggoth.
Poison Immunity. Generations of hunting venomous
subterranean creatures and perpetual exposure to the
molds and fungi that grow in the depths have forced
quaggoths to adapt immunities to poisons of all kinds.
<4__________________________________________k.
Variant: Quaggoth Thonot
A quaggoth thonot is a normal quaggoth with a challenge
rating of 3 (700 XP) and the following additional trait.
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The quaggoth's innate
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11). The
quaggoth can innately cast the following spells, requiring
no components:
At will: feather fall, mage hand (the hand is invisible)
1/day each: cure wounds, enlarge/reduce, heat metal,
mirror image



356
oi'Aui'OTrr

SLAV ME Omcp   c
Rakshasa
The rakshasa employs delicacy and misdirection in its
pursuit of dominion over others. Few creatures ever see
the fiend in its true form, for it can take on any guise it
wants, although it prefers to masquerade as someone
powerful or influential: a noble, cardinal, or rich
merchant, for example. A rakshasa's true form combines
the features of a human and a tiger, with one noteworthy
deformity: its palms are where the backs of the hands
would be on a human.
Evil Spirits in Mortal Flesh. Rakshasas originated
long ago in the Nine Hells, when powerful devils
created a dark ritual to free their essence from their
fiendish bodies in order to escape the Lower Planes. A
rakshasa enters the Material Plane to feed its appetite
for humanoid flesh and evil schemes. It selects its prey
with cafe, taking pains to keep its presence in the
world a secret.
Evil Reborn. For a rakshasa, death on the Material
Plane means an agonizing and torturous return to the
Nine Hells, where its essence remains trapped until its
body reforms—a process that can take months or years.
When the rakshasa is reborn, it has all the memories
and knowledge of its former life, and it seeks retribution
against the one who slew it. If the target has somehow
slipped through its grasp, the rakshasa might punish its
killer's family, friends, or descendants.
Like devils, rakshasas killed in the Nine Hells are
forever destroyed.
Rakshasa
Medium fiend, lawful evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 110 (13d8 +52)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      17 (+3)      18 (+4)      13 (+1)     16 (+3)      20 (+5)
Skills Deception +10, Insight+8
Damage Vulnerabilities piercing from magic weapons wielded
by good creatures
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Infernal
Challenge 13(10,000 XP)
Limited Magic Immunity. The rakshasa is immune to spells
of 6th level or lower unless it wishes to be affected. It has
advantage on saving throws against all qth'ef spells and
magical effects.
Innate Spellcasting. The rakshasa's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with spell attacks). The    I •
rakshasa can innately cast the following spells, requiring no
material components:
At will: detect thoughts, disguise self, mage hand, minor illusion
3/day each: charm person, detect magic, invisibility, major image,
suggestion
1/day each: dominate person, fly, plane shift, true seeing
Actions
Multiattack. The rakshasa makes two claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage, and the target is cursed if       J
it is a creature. The magical curse takes effect whenever the
target takes a short or long rest, filling the target's thoughts
with horrible images and dreams. The cursed target gains no
benefit from finishing a short or long rest. The curse lasts until   i
it is lifted by a remove curse spell or similar magic.
"-   -■-                1
207
REMORjiAZES
855
Young Remorhaz
Large monstrosity, unaligned
From beneath ihe snow and ice bursts a remorhaz in
a cloud of steam, its body pulsing with internal fire.
Winglike fins flare from the back of the creature's head,
and its wide mouth brims with jagged teeth.
Arctic Predators. Remorhazes live in arctic climes,
preying on elk, polar bears, and other creatures sharing
their territory. They can't tolerate warm weather, having
adapted to the cold by generating a furnace-like heat
within their bodies. When hunting, a remorhaz burrows
deep below the snow and ice and lies in wait for the faint
vibrations created by a creature moving above it. While
hidden under the ice and snow, it can lower its body
temperature so that it doesn't melt its cover.
Young Ones. Frost giant hunters scour the icy wastes
for remorhaz nests and eggs. The giants prize young
remorhazes, which can be trained from hatching to obey
commands and guard the giants' icy citadels. Unlike
fully grown specimens, young remorhazes gnaw on
their victims instead of swallowing them whole.
-
Remorhaz
Huge hnonstrosity, unaligned
Armor £}&$'17?(n.afural armor)
Hit Points 195 (17dl2 + 85)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
24 (+7)      13 (+1)      21 (+5)       4 (-3)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Damage Immunities cold, fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
Heated Body. A creature that touches the remorhaz or hits
it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6)
fire damage.
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 93 (lldlO + 33)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft.
Actions
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      13 (+1)      17 (+3)       3 (-4)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
I Damage Immunities cold, fire
I Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 10
I Languages —
1 Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Heated Body. A creature that touches the remorhaz or hits
it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 7 (2d6)
fire damage.
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (3dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 40 (6dl0 + 7) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) fire damage.
If the target is a creature, it is grappled (escape DC 17). Until
this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the remorhaz
can't bite another target.
Swallow. The remorhaz makes one bite attack against a
Medium or smaller creature it is grappling. If the attack hits,
that creature takes the bite's damage and is swallowed, and
the grapple ends. While swallowed, the creature is blinded and
restrained, it has total cover against attacks and other effects
outside the remorhaz, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid damage at the
start of each of the remorhaz's turns.
If the remorhaz takes 30 damage or more on a single turn
from a creature inside it, the remorhaz must succeed on a
DC 15 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or
regurgitate all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a
space within 10 feet of the remorhaz. If the remorhaz dies, a
swallowed creature is no longer restrained by it and can escape
from the corpse using 15 feet of movement, exiting prone.
-
'
RF.MORHA7.EJ
RF.fcU
_

Revenant
A revenant forms from the soul of a mortal who met a
cruel and undeserving fate. It claws its way back into the
world to seek revenge against the one who wronged it.
The revenant reclaims its mortal body and superficially
resembles a zombie. However, instead of lifeless eyes,
a revenant's eyes burn with resolve and flare in the
presence of its adversary. If the revenant's original
body was destroyed or is otherwise unavailable, the
spirit of the revenant enters another humanoid corpse.
Regardless of the body the revenant uses as a vessel,
its adversary always recognizes the revenant for what
it truly is.
Hunger for Revenge. A revenant has only one year to
exact revenge. When its adversary dies, or if the revenant
fails to kill its adversary before its time runs out, it
crumbles to dust and its soul fades into the afterlife. If its
foe is too powerful for the revenant to destroy on its own,
it seeks worthy allies to help it fulfill its quest.
Divinejustice. No magic can hide a creature pursued
by a revenant, which always knows the direction and
distance between it and the target of its vengeance. In
cases where the revenant seeks revenge against more
than one adversary, it pursues them one at a time,
starting with the creature that dealt it the killing blow.
If the revenant's body is destroyed, its soul flies forth to
seek out a new corpse in which to resume its hunt.
Undead Nature. A revenant doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Revenant
Medium undead, neutral
Armor Class 13 (leather armor)
Hit Points 136 (16d8 + 64)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      14 (+2)     18 (+4)      13 (+1)     16 (+3)      18 (+4)
Saving Throws Str +7, Con +7, Wis +6, Cha +7
Damage Resistances necrotic, psychic
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned, stunned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Regeneration. The revenant regains 10 hit points at the start
of its turn. If the revenant takes fire or radiant damage, this
trait doesn't function at the start of the revenant's next turn.
The revenant's body is destroyed only if it starts its turn with
0 hit points and doesn't regenerate.
Rejuvenation. When the revenant's body is destroyed, its soul
' lingers. After 24 hours, the soul inhabits and animates another
■ corpse on the same plane of existence and regains all its hit
points. While the soul is bodiless, a wish spell can be used to
| force the soul to go to the afterlife and not return.
Turn Immunity. The reveriant is, immune £6 effects that
turn undead.
Vengeful Tracker. The revenant knows the distance to and
direction of any creature against which it seeks revenge, even
if the creature and the revenant are on different planes of
existence. If the creature being tracked by the revenant dies,
the revenant knows.
Actions
Multiattack. The revenant makes two fist attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a creature
against which the revenant has sworn vengeance, the target
takes an extra 14 (4d6) bludgeoning damage. Instead of dealing
damage, the revenant can grapple the target (escape DC 14)
provided the target is Large or smaller.
Vengeful Clare. The revenant targets one creature it can see
within 30 feet of it and against which it has sworn vengeance.
The target must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. On a
failure, the target is paralyzed until the revenant deals damage
to it, or until the end of the revenant's next turn. When the
paralysis ends, the target is frightened of the revenant for 1
minute. The frightened target can repeat the saving throw at
the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if it can see
the revenant, ending the frightened condition on itself on
a success.
--■--
f
259

/
V

Roc
At first sight, a roc's silhouette looks much like any other
bird of prey. As it descends, however, its unearthly size
becomes terrifyingly clear. In flight, a roc's wingspan
spreads two hundred feet or more. At rest, perched upon
^he mountain peaks that are its home, this monstrous
bird rivals the oldest dragons in size.
Sky Titans. In the ancient days when giants battled
dragons for control of the world, Annam, the father of
the giant gods, created the rocs so that his worshipers
might challenge the dragons' dominance of the air.
When the war ended, the rocs were freed from giant
domination and spread throughout the world.
Though cloud giants and storm giants sometimes
tame these great birds, rocs treat even giants as
potential prey. They fly great distances in search of food,
soaring high above the clouds to reach their favored
hunting grounds. A roc seldom hunts swift or small
creatures, and it ignores towns and forests where prey
can easily take cover. When it locates a large and slow-
moving target such as a giant, a whale, or an elephant, a
roc dives down to snatch its prey in its massive talons.
Remote and Alone. Rocs are solitary creatures
that can live for centuries. They lair in nests made
from trees, tents, broken ships, and the remains of
caravans they carry off, placing these massive tangles in
mountain clefts out of the reach of lesser creatures.
Sometimes a roc's nest contains treasures from the
caravans or ships they raid, but these creatures are
heedless of such baubles. More rarely, a nest holds eggs
that are taller than a human, produced by the rocs'
infrequent rnating.
P

Roc
Gargantuan 'monstrosity, unaligned
W r    Uilu ir'i'
Armor CI4ss 15,-(natural armor)
Hitl»pi|Hf248(16d20 + 80)
Speed 20'ft, fly 120 ft.
STR
28 (+9)
DEX
10 (+0)
CON
20 (+5)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
9(-l)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +3
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
----------------------------------------------------------------
Keen Sight. The roc has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions

Multiattack. The roc makes two attacks: one with its beak and
one with its talons.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 27 (4d8 + 9) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 23 (4d6 + 9) slashing damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 19). Until this grapple ends, the target is
restrained, and the roc can't use its talons on another target.

»QP

Roper
Living in caves and caverns throughout the Underdark,
voracious ropers feast on whatever they can catch and
seize. A roper eats any creature, from Underdark beasts
to adventurers and their gear.
A roper has the appearance of a stalagmite or
stalactite, which often allows it to attack with surprise.
The creature can move slowly using thousands of
sticky cilia beneath its base. It creeps up cave walls
and along stone ceilings, finding the best position from
which to attack.
Underdark Hunters. The roper is an evolved,
mature form of piercer, with which it shares its rock-
like appearance and hunting tactics. A roper can hold
still for long hours, shutting its single eye to look like
nothing more than a mundane formation of rock.
Creatures that come too close are surprised when
that eye snaps open and sticky tendrils shoot out
to seize them. The roper then makes horrible
guttural sounds as it reels in its struggling
victims, drawing them close for the fatal bite of
its stony teeth.
Aroper can digest anything it eats with the
exception of platinum, gemstones, and magic
items, which can sometimes be retrieved from the
creature's gizzard after death. A roper's digestive juices
are also valuable, fetching a high price from alchemists
who use them as a solvent.
Weakening Tendrils. A roper has six nubs set
along its body, through which it extrudes sticky
tendrils that bond to whatever they touch. Each
tendril sends out hair-like growths that penetrate
a creature's flesh and sap its strength, so the
victim can struggle only weakly as the roper
reels it in. If a tendril is cut through or broken,
the roper produces a new one to replace it.
Roper
Large monstrosity, neutral evil
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 93 (lldlO + 33)
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
I    18 (+4)       8(-1)      17 (+3)       7 (-2)      16 (+3)      6 (-2)
1 ——-------------------------------
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16
i Languages —
I Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
False Appearance. While the roper remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a normal cave formation, such as a
I stalagmite.
Grasping Tendrils. The roper can have up to six tendrils at
I a time. Each tendril can be attacked (AC 20; 10 hit points;
immunity to poison and psychic damage). Destroying a tendril
deals no damage to the rdper, which can ext'rude>a replacement I*
tendril on its next turn. A tendril can also be broken If a;
creature takes an action and succeeds on a DC 15 Strength
check against it.
Spider Climb. The roper can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Multiattack. The roper makes four attacks with its tendrils,
uses Reel, and makes one attack with its bite.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Tendril. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 50 ft., one
creature. Hit: The target is grappled (escape DC 15). Until the
grapple ends, the target is restrained and has disadvantage
on Strength checks and Strength saving throws, and the roper
can't use the same tendril on another target.
Reel. The roper pulls each creature grappled by it up to 25 feet
straight toward it.
■
«6.i
^£'   ,-Kt •*• J^o"*'6*  t,^o»*
..m
Rust Monster
Most dwarves would rather face a squad of ores than
confront a single rust monster. These strange, normally
docile creatures corrode ferrous metals, then gobble up
the rust they create. In doing so, they have ruined the
armor, shields, and weapons of countless adventurers.
A rust monster's body is covered in thick, lumpy
armor, its long tail ends in a bony protrusion, and two
feathery antennae sprout from its insectile head.
Underground Scavengers. Rust monsters roam
subterranean passages in search of ferrous metals such
••.asjron, steel, adamantine, and mithral to consume.
They ignore creatures not carrying such metals, but can
become aggressive toward those bearing steel weapons
and armor. A rust monster can smell its food at a
distance, immediately dashing toward the scent's source
to corrode and consume the object.
A rust monster doesn't care if the rust it consumes
comes from a spike or a sword. Adventurers can distract
the creature by dropping ferrous objects behind them.
Subterranean Wanderers. Rust monsters are rarely
found in large numbers, preferring to hunt alone or in
small groups. They meander along tunnels, moving
from cave to cave in their tireless search for ferrous
metals to consume. Their wanderings often bring them
into contact with other Underdark denizens that find
them harmless or unappetizing. Thus, rust monsters
may be found in close proximity to other subterranean
monsters. If they are well treated and well fed, they can
also become friendly companions or pets.
Rust Monster
Medium monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      13 (+1)       6 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Iron Scent. The rust monster can pinpoint, by scent, the
location of ferrous metal within 30 feet of it.
Rust Metal. Any nonmagical weapon made of metal that hits
the rust monster corrodes. After dealing damage, the weapon
takes a permanent and cumulative -1 penalty to damage rolls.
If its penalty drops to -5, the weapon is destroyed. Nonmagical
ammunition made of metal that hits the rust monster is
destroyed after dealing damage.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage.
Antennae. The rust monster corrodes a nonmagical ferrous
metal object it can see within 5 feet of it. If the object isn't
being worn or carried, the touch destroys a 1-foot cube of it. If
the object is being worn or carried by a creature, the creature
can make a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw to avoid the rust
monster's touch.
If the object touched is either metal armor or a metal shield
being worn or carried, its takes a permanent and cumulative
-1 penalty to the AC it offers. Armor reduced to an AC of 10
or a shield that drops to a +0 bonus is destroyed. If the object
touched is a held metal weapon, it rusts as described in the
Rust Metal trait.



Sahuagin
Across fog-shrouded coasts or endless ocean swells,
an ominous drone sounded on a conch shell chills
the blood of all who hear it. This is the sound of the
sahuagin hunting horn—a call to raid and battle. Coastal
settlers refer to sahuagin as "sea devils," for sahuagin
have no compassion in them, slaughtering the crews of
ships and decimating coastal villages.
Devils of the Deep. Sahuagin are a predatory, piscine
race that ventures from the ocean's black depths to
hunt the creatures of the shallows and shore.
Though they dwell in the deepest trenches of
the ocean, sahuagin view the entire aquatic
realm as their kingdom and the creatures
in it as blood sport for their
hunting parties.
The self-styled rulers of
sahuagin ocean domains are massive mutant
males that grow second sets of arms. They are
terrible foes in battle, and all sahuagin bow down before
these powerful barons.
Way of the Shark. Sahuagin worship the shark god
Sekolah. Only female sahuagin are deemed worthy
of channeling the god's power, and priestesses hold
tremendous sway in sahuagin communities.
Sahuagin are driven into a frenzy by the smell of
fresh blood. As worshipers of Sekolah, they also have a
special kinship with sharks, which they train as attack
animals. Even untrained sharks recognize sahuagin as
allies and don't prey on them.
Elven Enmity. The sahuagin might control the ocear
if not for the presence of their mortal enemies, the-
aquatic elves. Wars between the two races have raged
for centuries across the coasts and seas of the world,
disrupting maritime trade and drawing other races into
the bloody conflict.
So intense is sahuagin hatred for the aquatic elves
that the sea devils have adapted to combat their ancient
foes. A sahuagin born near enough to an aquatic
elf community can enter the world as a malenti—a
sahuagin that physically resembles an aquatic elfin
every way. Sahuagin are prone to mutation, but whether
this rare phenomenon is a result of the wars between
the sahuagin and the aquatic elves—or whether it
preceded or even began the conflict—none can say.
The sahuagin put the malenti to good use as spies
and assassins in aquatic elf cities and the societies of
other creatures that pose a threat to sahuagin. The
mere shadow of the malenti threat incites paranoia
and suspicion among aquatic elves, whose resilience is
weakened as the prelude to an actual sahuagin invasion.
'The village was empty, the seagulls were
STRANGELY ftUIET, AND Al'l WE COULD HEAR WAS
THE SURGE OF THE SEA."
-An accounY of the aftermath
OF A SAHUAGIN RAID
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)       12 (+1)      13 (+1)       9(-l)
Skills Perception +5
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Sahuagin
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The sahuagin has advantage on melee attack
rolls against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
Limited Amphibiousness. The sahuagin can breathe air and
water, but it needs to be submerged at least once every 4 hours
to avoid suffocating.
Shark Telepathy. The sahuagin can magically command any
shark within 120 feet of it, using a limited telepathy.
Actions
Multiattack. The sahuagin makes two melee attacks: one with
its bite and one with its claws or spear.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) slashing damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage, or
5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
■ U*
<^t    ?6J
Sahuagin Priestess
Medium humanoid (sahuagin), lawful evil
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft.
Sahuagin Baron
Large humanoid (sahuagin), lawfuI'MI
STR
13 (+1)
DEX         CON
11 (+0)      12 (+1)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      14 (+2)      13 (+1)
Armor Class 16 (breastplate)'
Hit Points 76 (9dl0 + 27)
Speed 30 ft., swim 50 ft.
I Skills Perception +6, Religion +3
I Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
I Languages Sahuagin
I Challenge 2 (450 XP)
-----------------------------------------------------------
I Blood Frenzy. The sahuagin has advantage on melee attack
I rolls against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
I Limited Amphibiousness. The sahuagin can breathe air and
I water, but she needs to be submerged at least once every 4
I hours to avoid suffocating.
I Shark Telepathy. The sahuagin can magically command any
I shark within 120 feet of her, using a limited telepathy.
Spellcasting. The sahuagin is a 6th-level spellcaster. Her
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with
I spell attacks). She has the following cleric spells prepared:
1 Cantrips (at will): guidance, thaumaturgy
I 1st level (4 slots): bless, detect magic, guiding bolt
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, spiritual weapon (trident)
3rd level (3 slots): mass healing word, tongues
Actions
I Multiattack. The sahuagin makes two attacks: one with her
bite and one with her claws.
I Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) slashing damage.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)      14 (+2)     13 (+1)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex+5, Con +6, lnt+5, Wis +4
Skills Perception +7
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Sahuagin
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The sahuagin has advantage on melee attack
rolls against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
Limited Amphibiousness. The sahuagin can breathe air and
water, but he needs to be submerged at least once every 4
hours to avoid suffocating.
Shark Telepathy. The sahuagin can magically command any
shark within 120 feet of him, using a limited telepathy.
Actions
Multiattack. The sahuagin makes three attacks: one with his
bite and two with his claws or trident.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit.', 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
I range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage,
I or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to
I make a melee attack.

364
I   SAHU

Salamanders
Salamanders slither across the Sea of Ash on the
Elemental Plane of Fire, their sinuous coils and jagged
spines smoldering. Intense heat washes off their bodies,
while their yellow eyes glow like candles in the deep-set
hollows of their hawkish faces.
Salamanders adore power, and they delight in setting
fire to things. Outside their home plane, they play among
the burning skeletons of charred trees as forest fires
rage around them, or slither down the slopes of erupting
volcanoes to linger in fire pits and magma floes.
Fire Snakes. Salamanders hatch from eggs that
are two-foot-diameter spheres of smoldering obsidian.
When a salamander is ready to hatch, it melts its way
through the egg's thick shell and emerges as a fire
snake. A fire snake matures into a salamander adult
within a year.
Slaves of the Efreet. Long ago, the efreet hired azers|
to build the fabled City of Brass, but then failed in their
attempt to enslave that mystical race when the azers'
work was done. Turning instead to strike against the
salamanders, the efreet had better luck in establishing
a slave race, which they use to unleash war and
destruction across the planes.
Salamanders despise the azers, believing that if
the efreet had succeeded in dominating that race of
elemental crafters, the salamanders would still be free.
The efreet use this enmity to their own advantage,
stoking the salamanders' hatred and pitting them
against the efreets' former servants.
The efreet suffer salamanders to serve no other
master; when efreet encounter salamanders dedicated
to the cults of Elemental Evil, they slay them rather than
taking them as slaves.
Domineering Nobles. Although salamanders follow
the destructive impulses of their fiery nature, slavery
under the efreet has impacted the culture of free
salamanders. They rule their own societies according
to the efreet model, in which larger and stronger
salamanders claim dominion over their lesser kin.
As salamanders age, they increase in size and status,
. rising to positions of power as cruel nobles among their
kind. Nobles rule wandering bands of salamanders,
which move across the Elemental Plane of Fire like
desert nomads, raiding other communities for treasure.
Living Forges. Salamanders generate intense heat,
and when they fight, their weapons glow red and
sear the bodies of their enemies on contact. Even
approaching a salamander is dangerous, since flesh
blisters and burns in its proximity.
This inherent heat is an asset to salamanders' skill
as smiths, allowing them to soften and shape iron and
steel with their bare hands. Although not as meticulous
as azers, salamanders number among the greatest
metalsmiths in all the planes. Powerful creatures
summon them as warriors, but others enlist the
salamanders for their crafting skills, or bind them to
forges and ovens to generate limitless heat.
Armor Class 14- (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
12 (+1)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)     11 (+0)
INT
7 (-2)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)
Damage Vulnerabilities cold
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands Ignan but can't speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Heated Body. A creature that touches the snake or hits it with a
melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Actions
Multiattack. The snake makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its tail.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
3 (ld4 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.


Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 90 (12dl0 + 24)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      14 (+2)      15 (+2)      11 (+0)     10 (+0)      12 (+1)
Damage Vulnerabilities cold
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
LanguagesIgnan
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Heated Body. A creature that touches the salamander or hits
it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 7 (2d6)
fire damage.
Heated Weapons. Any metal melee weapon the salamander
wields deals an extra 3 (ld6) fire damage on a hit (included in
the attack).
Actions_____________________________
Muttiattack. The salamander makes two attacks: one with its
spear and one with its tail.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20 ft./60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing
damage, or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two
hands to make a melee attack, plus 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit; 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) fire
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 14). Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained, the salamander can
automatically hit the target with its tail, and the salamander
can't make tail attacks against other targets.
SAMtoANDERS
Satyr

Satyrs are raucous fey that frolic in wild forests, driven
by curiosity and hedonism in equal measure.
Satyrs resemble stout male humans with the furry
lower bodies and cloven hooves of goats. Horns sprout
from their heads, ranging in shape from a pair of small
nubs to large, curling rams' horns. They typically sport
facial hair.
Hedonistic Revelers. Satyrs crave the strongest
drink, the most fragrant spices, and the most dizzying
dances. A satyr feels starved when it can't indulge
itself, and it goes to great lengths to sate its desires. It
might kidnap a fine minstrel to hear lovely songs, sneak
through a well-defended garden to gaze upon a beautiful
lad or lass, or infiltrate a palace to taste the finest food in
the land. Satyrs allow no festivity to pass them by. They
partake in any holiday they've heard of. Civilizations of
the world have enough festivals and holy days among
them to justify nonstop celebration.
Inebriated on drink and pleasure, satyrs give no
thought to the consequences of the hedonism they incite
in others. They leave such creatures mystified at their
own behavior. Such revelers might have to scrounge
for excuses to explain their disordered state to parents,
employers, family, or friends.
Variant: Satyr Pipes
A satyr might carry panpipes that it can play to create
magical effects. Usually, only one satyr in a group carries
such pipes. If a satyr has pipes, it gains the following
additional action option.
Panpipes. The satyr plays its pipes and chooses one
of the following magical effects: a charming melody, a
frightening strain, or a gentle lullaby. Any creature within 60
feet of the satyr that can hear the pipes must succeed on
a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or be affected as described
below. Other satyrs and creatures that can't be charmed are
unaffected.
An affected creature can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
'  If a creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends
for it, the creature is immune to these panpipes for the
next 24 hours.
Charming Melody. The creature is charmed by the satyr for
1 minute. If the satyr or any of its companions harms the
creature, the effect on it ends immediately.
Frightening Strain. The creature is frightened for 1 minute.
Gentle Lullaby. The creature falls asleep and is unconscious
for 1 minute. The effect ends if the creature takes damage or
if someone takes an action to shake the creature awake.
,.jc= cBiolTS GOAD me ON
Tw„T OAV AND N.GHT TH       -«-               wEBE puR£
THEV LAUGH AND SCREAM "™«.               B(JT THR1CE
NOW F.LL MV CUP NOT ONCE, NOT TW        .
*......^r::::zziz^
I CT unseen pixies toss theiku
Si I. TH, CARNAL KlNG. ^f^Z* LEAVE
As MERRV DAMSELS   C««     '     °                    BREE«
MY song doth stir them ^J^
THEV F,LL MINE EMPTV CUP «^               ^
tHE SUN BECOMES THE MOON BECOMES
I WHILE AWAV THE HOURS AS      P      ^^^ QF ft N/VUGHTy SATVR
Armor Class 14 (leather armor)
Hit Points 31 (7d8)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
12 (+1)      16 (+3)     11 (+0)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)     10 (+0)      14 (+2)
Skills Perception +2, Performance +6, Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Magic Resistance. The satyr has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Shortswoid. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
267
IT
1SGAREdROW
" At harvest time, when de
death revisits the twilit world and
summer's blossoms bow their withered heads, eerie
'scarecrows loom in silent vigil over empty fields. With
immortal patience, these stoic sentinels hold their posts
through wind, storm, and flood, bound to their master's
command, eager to terrify prey with its sackcloth visage
and rend victims with its razor-sharp claws.
Spirit-Powered Constructs. A scarecrow is animated
by the bound spirit of a slain evil creature, granting it
purpose and mobility. It is this uncanny presence from
beyond death that allows a scarecrow to inspire fear
in those it gazes upon. Hags and witches often bind
scarecrows with the spirits of demons, but any evil spirit
will do. Although aspects of the spirit's personality
might surface, a scarecrow's spirit doesn't recall the
memories it had as a creature, and its will is focused
solely on serving its creator. If its creator dies, the spirit
inhabiting a scarecrow either continues to follow its
last commands, seeks revenge for its creator's death, or
destroys itself.
Construct Nature. A scarecrow doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
Scarecrow
Medium construct, chaotit evil
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 36 (8d8)
Speed 30 ft.
„STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
I .11 (+0)      13 (+1)      11 (+0)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      13 (+1)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands the languages of its creator but
can't speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
False Appearance. While the scarecrow remains motionless, it
is indistinguishable from an ordinary, inanimate scarecrow.
Actions
Multiattack. The scarecrow makes two claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage, if the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or be
frightened until the end of the scarecrow's next turn.
Terrifying Clare. The scarecrow targets one creature it can
see within 30 feet of it. If the target can see the scarecrow, the
target must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or be
magically frightened until the end of the scarecrow's next turn.
The frightened target is paralyzed.
-   ■-                               '-   -    '-        ■-■!
Shadow
Shadows are undead that resemble dark exaggerations
of humanoid shadows.
Dark Disposition. From the darkness, the shadow
reaches out to feed on living creatures' vitality. They
can consume any living creature, but they are especially
drawn to creatures untainted by evil. A creature that
lives a life of goodness and piety consigns its basest
impulses and strongest temptations to the darkness
where the shadows hunger. As a shadow drains its
victim's strength and physical form, the victim's shadow
darkens and begins to move of its own volition. In death,
the creature's shadow breaks free, becoming a new
undead shadow hungry for more life to consume.
If a creature from which a shadow has been created
somehow returns to life, its undead shadow senses
the return. The shadow might seek its "parent" to
vex or slay. Whether the shadow pursues its living
counterpart, the creature that birthed the shadow no
longer casts one until the monster is destroyed.
Undead Nature. A shadow doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
"
Shadow
Medium undead, chaotic evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
6 (-2)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      13 (+1)
INT          WIS
6 (-2)      10 (+0)
CHA
8(-l)
Skills Stealth +4 (+6 in dim light or darkness)
Damage Vulnerabilities radiant
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning,
thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
I Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
, Languages —
: Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
^■^■"■^^""■■■^^^"■■^^^^■^"^
Amorphous. The shadow can move through a space as narrow
■1 as 1 inch wide without squeezing.
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the shadow
can take the Hide action as a bonus action.
, Sunlight Weakness. While in sunlight, the shadow has
! disadvantage on attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws,   '
Actions
Strength Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one creature. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) necrotic damage, and the target's
Strength score is reduced by ld4. The target dies if this reduces
its Strength to 0. Otherwise, the reduction lasts until the target
finishes a short or long rest.
If a non-evil humanoid dies from this attack, a new shadow
rises from the corpse ld4 hours later.
>J
269
270
Shambling Mound
A shambling mound, sometimes called a shambler,
trudges ponderously through bleak swamps, dismal
marshes, and rain forests, consuming any organic
matter in its path. This rotting heap of animated
vegetation looms up half again as tall as a human,
tapering into a faceless "head" at its top.
All-Consuming Devourers. A shambling mound
feeds on any organic material, tirelessly consuming
plants as it moves and devouring animals that can't
escape it. Only the shambling mounds' rarity and
plodding speed prevent them from overwhelming entire
ecosystems. Even so, their presence leeches natural
environments of plant and animal life, and an unsettling
quiet pervades the swamps and woods haunted by these
ever-hungry horrors.
Unseen Hunters. Composed of decaying leaves,
vines, roots, and other natural swamp and forest
compost, shamblers can blend into their environs.
Because they move slowly, they rarely attempt to
pursue and catch creatures. Rather, they remain in
place, sustaining themselves by absorbing nutrients
from their surroundings as they wait for prey to come <*
to them. When a creature passes near or alights upon
a shambling mound, the monster comes to life, seizing
and absorbing the unwary prey.
Spawned by Lightning. A shambling mound results
from a phenomenon in which lightning or fey magic
invigorates an otherwise ordinary swamp plant. As the
plant is reborn into its second life, it chokes the life from
plants and animals around it, mulching their corpses
in a heap around its roots. Those roots eventually give
up their reliance on the soil, directing the shambling
mound to seek out new sources of food.
The Weed that Walks. The instinct that drives
a shambling mound is its central root-stem, buried
somewhere inside its ponderous form. The rest
of a shambler consists of the rotting heap that it
simultaneously accumulates and feeds on, which
protects the root-stem and animates to smash and
smother the life from any creature.
The dense mass of a shambling mound's body shrugs
off the effects of cold and fire. Lightning reinvigorates
the root-stem, strengthening the shambling mound and
bolstering its consumptive drive.
Despite its monstrous form, the shambling mound is a
living plant that requires air and nourishment. Although
it doesn't sleep the way an animal does, it can lie
dormant for days on end before rising to hunt for food.
A Resurgent Menace. If a shambling mound faces
defeat before an overwhelming foe, the root-stem can
feign death, collapsing the remains of its mound. If not
subsequently killed, the root-stem beds down in the
shambler's remains to slowly regrow its full body, then
once again sets out to consume all it can. In this way,
shambling mound infestations long thought destroyed
can recur time and again.
£HA«|tfftIJNGMO|JNI)
Shambling Mound
Large plant, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16dl0 + 48)
Speed 20 ft,, swim 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)       8 (-1)      16 (+3)       5 (-3)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Skills Stealth +2
Damage Resistances cold, fire
Damage Immunities lightning
I Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, exhaustion
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Lightning Absorption. Whenever the shambling mound is
subjected to lightning damage, it takes no damage and regains   I
a number of hit points equal to the lightning damage dealt.
I Actions___________________________I
Multiattack. The shambling mound makes two slam attacks.
I If both attacks hit a Medium or smaller target, the target is
grappled (escape DC 14), and the shambling mound uses its
Engulf on it.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
I Engulf. The shambling mound engulfs a Medium or smaller
I creature grappled by it. The engulfed target is blinded,
I restrained, and unable to breathe, and it must succeed on a
J DC 14 Constitution saving throw at the start of each of the
I mound's turns or take 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the   I
mound moves, the engulfed target moves with it. The mound
can have only one creature engulfed at a time.
t-                      ...-..■-                            i
>
Shield Guardian
Wizards and other spellcasters create shield guardians
for protection. A shield guardian treads beside its
master, absorbing damage to keep its master alive as
long as possible.
Master's Amulet. Every shield guardian has an
amulet magically linked to it. A shield guardian can
have only one corresponding amulet, and if that amulet
is destroyed, the shield guardian is incapacitated until
a replacement amulet is created. A shield guardian's
amulet is subject to direct attack if it isn't being worn
or carried. It has AC 10,10 hit points, and immunity to
poison and psychic damage. Crafting an amulet requires
1 week and costs 1,000 gp in components.
A shield guardian's solitary focus is to protect the
amulet's wearer. The amulet's wearer can command the
guardian to attack its enemies or to guard the wielder
against attack. If an attack threatens to injure the
wearer, the construct can magically absorb the blow into
its own body, even at a distance.
A spellcaster can store a single spell within a shield
guardian, which can then cast the spell on command
or under specific conditions. Many a wizard has
been rendered helpless by enemies, only to surprise
those foes when its shield guardian unleashes potent
magical power.
Magnificent Treasure. Because a shield guardian's
ownership can be transferred by giving its matching
amulet to another creature, some wizards collect
exorbitant sums from princes, nobles, and crime lords
to create shield guardians for them. At the same time,
a shield guardian makes a mighty prize for anyone who
slays its master and claims its amulet.
, Construct Nature. A shield guardian doesn't require
air, food, drink, or sleep.
Shield Guardian
Large construct, unaligned
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 142 (15dl0 + 60)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)       8(-l)       18 (+4)       7 (-2)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Languages understands commands given in any language but
can't speak
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Bound. The shield guardian is magically bound to an amulet.
As long as the guardian and its amulet are on the same plane
of existence, the amulet's wearer can telepathically call the
guardian to travel to it, and the guardian knows the distance
and direction to the amulet. If the guardian is within 60 feet
of the amulet's wearer, half of any damage the wearer takes
(rounded up) is transferred to the guardian.
Regeneration. The shield guardian regains 10 hit pojnts at the
start of its turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Spell Storing. A spellcaster who wears the shield guardian's
amulet can cause the guardian to store one spell of 4th level or
lower. To do so, the wearer must cast the spell on the guardian.
The spell has no effect but is stored within the guardian. When
commanded to do so by the wearer or when a situation arises
that was predefined by the spellcaster, the guardian casts the
stored spell with any parameters set by the original caster,
requiring no components. When the spell is cast or a new spell
is stored, any previously stored spell is lost.
Actions
Multiattack. The guardian makes two fist attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Reactions____________________________
Shield. When a creature makes an attack against the wearer of
the guardian's amulet, the guardian grants a +2 bonus to the
wearer's AC if the guardian is within 5 feet of the wearer.

27'
Armor Class 13 (armor scraps)
Hit Points 13 (2d8 +4)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      14 (+2)      15 (+2)       6 (-2)       8 (-1)        5 (-3)
Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands all languages it knew in life but
can't speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
. Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Skeletons
Skeletons arise when animated by dark magic. They
heed the summons of spellcasters who call them from
their stony tombs and ancient battlefields, or rise of their
own accord in places saturated with death and loss,
awakened by stirrings of necromantic energy or the
presence of corrupting evil.
Animated Dead. Whatever sinister force awakens a
skeleton infuses its bones with a dark vitality, adhering
joint to joint and reassembling dismantled limbs. This
energy motivates a skeleton to move and think in a
rudimentary fashion, though only as a pale imitation of
the way it behaved in life. An animated skeleton retains
no connection to its past, although resurrecting a
i skeleton restores it body and soul, banishing the hateful
undead spirit that empowers it.
While most skeletons are the animated remains of
dead humans and other humanoids, skeletal undead can
be created from the bones of other creatures besides
humanoids, giving rise to a host of terrifying and
unique forms.
Obedient Servants. Skeletons raised by spell
are bound to the will of their creator. They follow
orders to the letter, never questioning the tasks their
masters give them, regardless of the consequences.
Because of their literal interpretation of commands
and unwavering obedience, skeletons adapt poorly to
changing circumstances. They can't read, speak, emote,
or communicate in any way except to nod, shake their
heads, or point. Still, skeletons are able to accomplish a
variety of relatively complex tasks.
A skeleton can fight with weapons and wear armor,
can load and fire a catapult or tfebuchet, scale a siege
ladder, form a shield wall, or dump boiling oil. However,
it must receive careful instructions explaining how such
tasks are accomplished.
Although they lack the intellect they possessed in
life, skeletons aren't mindless. Rather than break its
limbs attempting to batter its way through an iron
door, a skeleton tries the handle first. If that doesn't
work, it searches for another way through or around
the obstacle.
Habitual Behaviors. Independent skeletons
temporarily or permanently free of a master's control
sometimes pantomime actions from their past lives,
their bones echoing the rote behaviors of their former
living selves. The skeleton of a miner might lift a pick
and start chipping away at stone walls. The skeleton of
a guard might strike up a post at a random doorway.
The skeleton of a dragon might lie down on a pile of
treasure, while the skeleton of a horse crops grass it
can't eat. Left alone in a ballroom, the skeletons of
nobles might continue an eternally unfinished dance.
When skeletons encounter living creatures, the
necromantic energy that drives them compels them
to kill unless they are commanded by their masters to
refrain from doing so. They attack without mercy and
fight until destroyed, for skeletons possess little sense of
self and even less sense of self-preservation.
Undead Nature. A skeleton doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
272
v>.
Minotaur Skeleton
Large undead, Idwful evil
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 67 (9dl0+18)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
18 (+4)     11 (+0)     15 (+2)
INT
6 (-2)
WIS
8(-l)
CHA
5 (-3)
Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands Abyssal but can't speak
{ Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the skeleton moves at least 10 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or
be pushed up to 10 feet away and knocked prone.
Actions________________„_____________t__
Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (2dl2 + 4) slashing damage.
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Warhorse Skeleton
Large undead, lawful evil
Armor Class 13 (barding scraps)
Hit Points 22 (3dl0 h 6)
Speed 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      12 (+1)     15 (+2)      2 (-4)      8 (-1)       5 (-3)
Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.

>     273

Slaadi
Green Slaad
In the Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo, bits of forest
and meadow, ruined castles, and isolated islands drift
through a tumult of fire, water, earth, and wind. The
'.foremost inhabitants of this inhospitable plane are the
toad-like slaadi. Slaadi are undisciplined and have no
formal hierarchy, although weaker slaadi obey stronger
ones under threat of annihilation.
The Spawning Stone. Long ago, Primus, overlord of
the modrons, created a gigantic, geometrically complex
stone imbued with the power of law. He then cast it
adrift in Limbo, believing that the stone would bring
order to the chaos of that plane and halt the spread
of chaos to other planes. As the stone's power grew,
it became possible for creatures with ordered minds,
such as modrons and githzerai, to create enclaves in
Limbo. However, Primus's creation had an unforeseen
side effect: the chaotic energy absorbed by the stone
spawned the horrors that came to be known as slaadi.
Sages refer to Primus's massive creation as the
Spawning Stone for this reason.
The slaadi wiped out every last modron enclave
in Limbo. As creatures of utter chaos, slaadi loathe
modrons and attack them on sight. Nonetheless, Primus
stands by his creation and either doesn't perceive the
slaadi as threats or chooses to ignore them.
Birth and Transformation. Slaadi have horrific
cycles of reproduction. Slaadi reproduce either by
implanting humanoid hosts with eggs or by infecting
them with a transformative disease called chaos phage.
Each color of slaad reproduces or transforms in a
different way, with red slaadi spawning blue and green
slaadi, and blue slaadi spawning red and green. Each
,'green slaad undergoes a lifelong cycle of transformation
' iijto the more powerful gray and death slaadi. With each
^transformation, the slaad retains its memories.
Shapechangers. Some slaadi can transform into the
humanoid creatures from which they were originally
spawned. These slaadi return to the Material Plane to
^sow discord in the guise of their former selves.
RSpJSlaad_____________________
' When a red slaad claws a humanoid creature, it can
inject an egg from a gland under one of its claws. The
egg works its way into its host and gestates, eventually
forming a slaad tadpole. Such a tadpole then eats its way
out of the host's body, feeds on the host's remains, and
then seeks any other fresh meat it can find. The tadpole
transforms into a fully grown blue slaad—or green
slaad if the host had the ability to cast 3rd level spells or
higher—within 2dl2 hours.
Blue Slaad_____________________
, The bone hooks that protrude from the back of a blue
slaad's hands inflict a terrible transformative disease
on humanoids wounded by them. This infection, called
chaos phage, transforms its victim into a fully grown red
slaad—or green slaad if the host was a spellcaster able
to cast 3rd level spells or higher.
Green slaadi are surprisingly intelligent and possess
innate spellcasting ability. A green slaad can change
its shape to appear as a humanoid. If it was born of a
humanoid host, the slaad usually adopts its host's form.
At some unpredictable point in its existence, a
green slaad unlocks the means to magically, instantly,
and permanently transform itself into a gray slaad.
Unlocking this knowledge can take years, even decades.
Gray Slaad
Outside of Limbo, gray slaadi act as living extensions of
the will of their masters, the death slaadi. A gray slaad
journeys to the Material Plane on errands of doom,
often taking humanoid form. A gray slaad learns how
to master the use of a greatsword and imbue it with its
own innate magic.
A gray slaad that eats the entire corpse of a dead
death slaad instantly transforms into a death slaad.
Death Slaad
Death slaadi are suffused with energy from the Negative
Energy Plane and exemplify evil's corruption of chaos,
and they take sadistic pleasure in bringing harm
to others. They propagate their race by dragooning
mobs of red and blue slaadi and invading other
planes. Humanoids who survive the incursion become
incubators for new slaadi.
.4____________________________________________________________hh.
Variant: Slaad Control Gems
As a slaad emerges from the Spawning Stone, the stone
magically implants a fragment of itself in the slaad's brain.
This fragment takes the form of a magic gem roughly the size
and shape of a human child's fist. The gem is the same color   (
as the slaad. Another creature can use magic to draw forth
a slaad's gem and use it to subjugate the slaad. The slaad
must obey whoever possesses its gem. If a slaad's gem is
destroyed, the slaad can no longer be controlled in this way.
A slaad born from something other than the Spawning
Stone has no gem in its brain, but it gains one if it ever
comes into contact with the Spawning Stone. Slaadi on
Limbo are attracted to the Spawning Stone, so most end up
with a gem. A slaad with a control gem in its brain has the
following additional trait.
Control Gem. Implanted in the slaad's brain is a magic
control gem. The slaad must obey whoever possesses the
gem and is immune to being charmed while so controlled.
Certain spells can be used to acquire the gem. If the slaad
fails its saving throw against imprisonment, the spell can
transfer the gem to the spellcaster's open hand, instead
of imprisoning the slaad. A wish spell, if cast in the slaad's
presence, can be worded to acquire the gem.
A greater restoration spell cast on the slaad destroys the
gem without harming the slaad.
Someone who is proficient in Wisdom (Medicine) can
remove the gem from an incapacitated slaad. Each try
requires 1 minute of uninterrupted work and a successful DC
20 Wisdom (Medicine) check. Each failed attempt deals 22
(4dl0) psychic damage to the slaad.
2H
r
**   •:':
»,
Reo Slaao

Blue Slaao

Green Slaad

.
BmMm
^

?l75
^&=
4
Red Slaad
Large aberration, chaotic neutral

Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 93 (11dl0 + 33)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX
12 (+1)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
6 (-2)
WIS
6 (-2)
CHA
7 (-2)
Skills Perception +1
Damage Resistances add, cold, fire, lightning, thund
j Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
' Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft.
> Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
er
Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a humanoid,
it must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be
infected with a disease—a minuscule slaad egg.
A humanoid host can carry only one slaad egg to term at a
time. Over three months, the egg moves to the chest cavity,
gestates, and forms a slaad tadpole. In the 24-hour period
before giving birth, the host starts to feel unwell, its speed is
halved, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls, ability checks,
and saving throws. At birth, the tadpole chews its way through
vital organs and out of the host's chest in 1 round, killing the
host in the process.
If the disease is cured before the tadpole's emergence, the
unborn slaad is disintegrated.
,..--!■  lr.^..J^,.<—.-;lUW,JMUIl.Hl----,.UJ'».WHW
....  ..I   .■■■- . i.--'MJU..> .,JA. '<•-!«
Slaad Tadpole
Tjnf aberration, chaotic neutral
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 10 (4d4)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
7 (-2)      15 (+2)     10 (+0)      3 (-4)      5 (-3)       3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +4
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 7
Languages understands Slaad but can't speak
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions__________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
333
■«.«...,     I-L
=3
iW^n&SJ'UiKffim
Blue Slaad
Large aberration, chaotic neutral
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 123 (13dl0+52)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)      15 (+2)     18 (+4)      7 (-2)      7 (-2)       9 (-1)
Skills Perception +1
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Actions
Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6+ 5) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. If the target is a humanoid,
it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be
infected with a disease called chaos phage. While infected,
the target can't regain hit points, and its hit point maximum is
reduced by 10 (3d6) every 24 hours. If the disease reduces the
target's hit point maximum to 0, the target instantly transforms
into a red slaad or, if it has the ability to cast spells of 3rd
level or higher, a green slaad. Only a wish spell can reverse the
transformation.

5(76

SUJim

j j.
i   i
Green Slaad
Large aberration (shapechanger), chaotic neutral
———r—■■■
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (15dl0 + 45)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX
18 (+4)      15 (+2)
CON           INT
16 (+3)      11 (+0)
WIS
8(-l)
CHA
12 (+1)
Skills Arcana +3, Perception +2
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder
Senses Hindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Shapechanger. The slaad can use its action to polymorph into
a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. Its
statistics, other than its size, are the same in each form. Any
equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts
to its true form if it dies.
Innate Spellcasting. The slaad's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 12). The slaad can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: detect magic, detect thoughts, mage hand
2/day each: fear, invisibility (self only)
\/day: fireball
Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Actions
Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws or staff. Alternatively, it uses its Hurl
Flame twice.
Bite (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5
ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) slashing damage.
Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 60 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. The fire ignites flammable
objects that aren't being worn or carried.
Embedded in a slaad's
BRAIN IS A MAGIC GEM.
AcftUIRE IT, AND THE SLAAD
IS YOURS TO COMMAND.
GraySlaad
Medium aberration (shapechanger); chaotic neutral
-
msu,
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (17d8 + 51)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS
17 (+3)      17 (+3)      16 (+3)      13 (+1)      8(-l)
CHA
14 (+2)
Skills Arcana +5, Perception +6
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Shapechanger. The slaad can use its action to polymorph into
I a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. Its
statistics, other than its size, are the same in each form. Any
equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts
to its true form if it dies.
I Innate Spellcasting. The slaad's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The slaad can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
' At will: detect magic, detect thoughts, invisibility (self only),
mage hand, major image
' 2/day each: fear, fly, fireball, tongues
I "\/day: plane shift (self only)
Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The slaad's weapon attacks are magical.
Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws or greatsword.
Bite (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Claws (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (IdlO + 3) slashing damage.
Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
?77
Death Slaad
Medium aberration (shapechanger), chaotic evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 170 (20d8 +80)
; Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)      15 (+2)     19 (+4)      15 (+2)     10 (+0)     16 (+3)
Skills Arcana +6, Perception +8
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP)
Shapechanger. The slaad can use its action to polymorph into
i a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. Its
statistics, other than its size, are the same in each form. Any
. equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts
' to its true form if it dies.
Innate Spellcasting. The slaad's innate spellcasting ability
| is Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks).
The slaad can innately cast the following spells, requiring no
I material components:
At-will: detect magic, detect thoughts, Invisibility (self only)t
mage hand, major image
2/day each: fear,fireball, fly, tongues
1/day each: cloudkill, plane shift
Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The slaad's weapon attacks are magical.
Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn if it has at least 1 hit point.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws or greatsword.
Bite (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6)
necrotic damage.
Claws (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (ldlO + 5) slashing damage plus
7 (2d6) necrotic damage.
Creatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6)
necrotic damage.
m
M
7T*
SPfcCTER
A specter is the angry, unfettered spirit of a humanoid
that has been prevented from passing to the afterlife.
Specters no longer possess connections to who or what
they were, yet are condemned to walk the world forever.
Some are spawned when dark magic or the touch of a
wraith rips a soul from a living body.
Beyond Redemption. When a ghost's unfinished
business is completed, it can rest at last. No such rest
or redemption awaits a specter. It is doomed to the
Material Plane, its only end the oblivion that comes
with the destruction of its soul. Until then, it bears out
its lonely life in forlorn places, carrying on forgotten
through the ages of the world.
Undying Hatred. Living creatures remind the specter
that life is beyond its grasp. The mere sight of the living
overwhelms a specter with sorrow and wrath, which
can be abated only by destroying said life. A specter kills
quickly and mercilessly, for only by depriving others
of life can it gain the slightest satisfaction. However,
no matter how many lives it extinguishes, a specter
always succumbs to its hatred and sorrow.
Dwellers in Darkness. Sunlight represents a
source of life that no specter can ever hope to douse,
and it pains them. When night falls, they leave their
final resting places in search of living creatures to slay,
knowing that few weapons can harm them in return.
At the first light of dawn, they retreat back into the
darkness, where they remain until night falls again.
Undead Nature. A specter doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
*__________________________________________fc.
Variant: Poltergeist
A poltergeist is a different kind of specter—the confused,
1 invisible spirit of an individual with no sense of how he or
she died. A poltergeist expresses its rage by hurling creatures
and objects using the power of its shattered psyche.
A poltergeist has a challenge rating of 2 (450 XP) and gains
the following additional trait:
Invisibility. The poltergeist is invisible.
The poltergeist has the following action options in place of
the specter's Life Drain:
Forceful Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) force damage.
Telekinetic Thrust. The poltergeist targets a creature or
unattended object within 30 feet of it. A creature must be
Medium or smaller to be affected by this magic, and an
object can weigh up to 150 pounds.
If the target is a creature, the poltergeist makes a
Charisma check contested by the target's Strength check.
If the poltergeist wins the contest, the poltergeist hurls
the target up to 30 feet in any direction, including upward.
If the target then comes into contact with a hard surface
or heavy object, the target takes ld6 damage per 10
feet moved.
If the target is an object that isn't being worn or carried,
the poltergeist hurls it up to 30 feet in any direction.
The poltergeist can use the object as a ranged weapon,
attacking one creature along the object's path (+4 to hit)
and dealing 5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage on a hit.

Medium undead, chaotic evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 0 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
1 (-5)       14 (+2)      11 (+0)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)     11 (+0)
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning,
thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained,
unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands all languages it knew in life but
can't speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Incorporeal Movement. The specter can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(ldlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the specter has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
i (Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Life Drain. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) necrotic damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or its hit point
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken.
This reduction lasts until the creature finishes a long rest. The
target dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
279
Sphinxes
Androsphinx
In sacred isolation, a sphinx guards the secrets and
treasures of the gods. As it calmly regards each new
party that comes before it, the bones of supplicants and
quest seekers that failed to pass its tests lie scattered
around its lair. Its great wings sweep along its flanks, its
tawny leonine body rippling with muscle and possessed
of forepaws powerful enough to tear a humanoid in half.
Divine Guardians. Sphinxes test the worth of those
who seek the treasures of the gods, whether forgotten
secrets or mighty spells, artifacts or magical gateways.
Creatures that choose to face a sphinx's test are bound
to that test unto death, and only those worthy will
survive it. The rest the sphinx destroys.
Some sphinxes are high priests of the gods that
create them, but most are simply embodied spirits,
brought into the mortal realm by devout prayer or direct
intervention. A sphinx maintains its vigil tirelessly, not
needing to sleep or eat. It rarely engages with others of
its kind, knowing no other life except its sacred mission.
Magical Tests. The secrets and treasures a sphinx
guards remain under divine protection, so that when
a creature fails a sphinx's test, the path to the object
or knowledge it guards vanishes. Even if a sphinx is
attacked and defeated, a quester will still fail to gain the
secret it sought—and will make an enemy of the god that
placed the sphinx as a guardian.
Benign deities sometimes grant a sphinx the power
to remove supplicants that fail their tests, transporting
them away and ensuring that they never encounter the
sphinx again. However, those who fail a sphinx's test
typically meet a gruesome end beneath its claws.
Extraplanar Beings. Mortals that encounter sphinxes
do so most often in ancient tombs and ruins, but some
sphinxes can access extraplanar realms. A conversation
with a sphinx that begins between tumbled stone
walls might suddenly shift to an alien locale, such as a
life-sized game board or a daunting cliff that must be
climbed in a howling storm. Sometimes a sphinx must
be summoned from such an extradimensional space,
with supplicants calling it from its empty lair. Only those
the sphinx deems worthy gain admittance to its realm.
Fallen Sphinxes. Whether through the weariness of
the ages, regret at the slaughter of innocents, or dreams
of worship by supplicants that attempt to bargain their
way to knowledge, some sphinxes break free of their
divine command. However, even if a sphinx's alignment
and loyalties drift in this way, it never leaves the place
it guards or grants its secrets to any except creatures it
deems worthy.
R°UNOSHE1s,VETFLAt
AltAR OFTHELup|NE
jewel ON black vEUvET peAB
°fwHITePlumeMountain
a8o
sfcijrNXES
Art androsphinx bears the head of a humanoid male
on its lion's body. Outwardly gruff and downcast, it
often begins conversations with insults or negative
observations. Beneath this gruff exterior, however, an
androsphinx has a noble heart. It has no wish to lie or
deceive, but it doesn't give away information readily,
choosing its words as wisely as it guards its secrets.
An androsphinx tests the courage and valor of
supplicants, not only by forcing them to complete quests
but also with its terrible roar, which echoes for miles
as it terrifies and deafens nearby creatures. Those who
pass its tests may be rewarded with a heroes' feast.
Gynosphinx_____________________
A gynosphinx bears the head of a humanoid female.
Many have the regal countenances of worldly queens,
but some are marked with wild, leonine features. A
gynosphinx's eyes see beyond the present time and
place, and penetrate veils of invisibility and magic.
Supplicants who look deep into those eyes might find
themselves magically displaced, banished to some far-
flung plane where a difficult trial awaits them.
Gynosphinxes are virtual libraries of knowledge
and lore. They ask riddles and present puzzles to test
the wit of supplicants that come to learn their secrets.
Some are willing to bargain with such supplicants for
treasure or service.
A Sphinx's Lair   ________________
A sphinx presides over an ancient temple, sepulcher,
or vault, within which are hidden divine secrets and
treasures beyond the reach of mortals.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the sphinx
can take a lair action to cause one of the following
magical effects; the sphinx can't use an effect again until
it finishes a short or long rest:
•  The flow of time is altered such that every creature in
the lair must reroll initiative. The sphinx can choose
not to reroll.
•  The effects of time are altered such that every crea-
ture in the lair must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
saving throw or become ld20 years older or younger
(the sphinx's choice), but never any younger than 1
year old. A greater restoration spell can restore a crea-
ture's age to normal.
•  The flow of time within the lair is altered such that
everything within moves up to 10 years forward or
backward (sphinx's choice). Only the sphinx is imme-
diately aware of the time change. A wish spell can
return the caster and up to seven other creatures des-
ignated by the caster to their normal time.
•  The sphinx shifts itself and up to seven other crea-
tures it can see within in its lair to another plane of
existence. Once outside its lair, the sphinx can't use
lair actions, but it can return to its lair as a bonus
action on its turn, taking up to seven creatures with it.
|Androsphinx
Large monstrosity, lawful neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 199 (19dl0 + 95)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.

STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)      10 (+0)     20 (+5)      16 (+3)     18 (+4)     23 (+6)
Saving Throws Dex+6, Con +11, lnt+9, Wis +10
Skills Arcana +9, Perception +10, Religion +15
Damage Immunities psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
I Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages Common, Sphinx
| Challenge 17 (18,000 XP)
\ Inscrutable. The sphinx is immune to any effect that would
I sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as any
j divination spell that it refuses. Wisdom (Insight) checks
1 made to ascertain the sphinx's intentions or sincerity have
disadvantage.
1 Magic Weapons. The sphinx's weapon attacks are magical.
I Spellcasting. The sphinx is a 12th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with
spell attacks). It requires no material components to cast its
I spells. The sphinx has the following cleric spells prepared:
W Cantrips (at will): sacred flame, spare the dying, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): command, detect evil and good, detect magic
J 2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, zone of truth
1 3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, tongues
I 4th level (3 slots): banishment, freedom of movement
1 5th level (2 slots): flame strike, greater restoration
6th level (1 slot): heroes'feast
Multiattack. The sphinx makes two claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
hi it: 17 (2dl0 + 6) slashing damage.
Roar (3/Day). The sphinx emits a magical roar. Each time it
roars before finishing a long rest, the roar is louder and the
effect is different, as detailed below. Each creature within
500 feet of the sphinx and able to hear the roar must make a
saving throw.
First Roar. Each creature that fails a DC 18 Wisdom saving
throw is frightened for 1 minute. A frightened creature can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success.
Second Roar. Each creature that fails a DC 18 Wisdom saving
throw is deafened and frightened for 1 minute. A frightened
creature is paralyzed and can repeat the saving throw at
the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on
a success.
Third Roar. Each creature makes a DC 18 Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 44 (8dl0) thunder
damage and is knocked prone. On a successful save, the
creature takes half as much damage and isn't knocked prone.
Legendary Actions__________________
The sphinx can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
sphinx regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Claw Attack. The sphinx makes one claw attack.
Teleport (Costs 2 Actions). The sphinx magically teleports,
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120
feet to an unoccupied space it can see.
Cast a Spell (Costs 3 Actions). The sphinx casts a spell from its
list of prepared spells, using a spell slot as normal.
w
4F'
281
\			X	^
		■-. ^'5		,"""""*
		'■-.     xt4,
		"V    "*'
V.		\ X	~-^*s
^x			"i%
'"\		Xf~»»	i»%^
^-J..V»H-lii.-=i. u«U^f--
Gynosphinx
Large monstrosity, lawful neutral
I Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16dl0 + 48)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR
18 (+4)
DEX         CON
15 (+2)      16 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)     18 (+4)     18 (+4)
Skills Arcana +14, History +14, Perception +9, Religion +9
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities psychic
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Common, Sphinx
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP)
1 Inscrutable. The sphinx is immune to any effect that would
I sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as any
divination spell that it refuses. Wisdom (Insight) checks
I made to ascertain the sphinx's intentions or sincerity have
I disadvantage.
:
I Magic Weapons. The sphinx's weapon attacks are magical.
J Spellcasting. The sphinx is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its
J spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit
with spell attacks). It requires no material components to cast
its spells. The sphinx has the following wizard spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, prestidigitation
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, identify, shield
2nd level (3 slots): darkness, locate object, suggestion
3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, remove curse, tongues
4th level (3 slots): banishment, greater invisibility
5th level (1 slot): legend lore
Actions
Multiattack. The sphinx makes two claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Legendary Actions____________________
The sphinx can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
sphinx regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Claw Attack. The sphinx makes one claw attack.
Teleport (Costs 2 Actions). The sphinx magically teleports,
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 12
feet to an unoccupied space it can see.
Cast a Spell (Costs 3 Actions). The sphinx casts a spell from its
list of prepared spells, using a spell slot as normal.
i
X

#8a
SI'HI
Sprite
In secret groves and shaded glens, tiny sprites with
dragonfly wings flutter. For all their fey splendor,
however, sprites lack warmth and compassion. They are
aggressive and hardy warriors, taking severe measures
to ward strangers away from their homes. Interlopers
that come too close have their moral character judged,
then are put to sleep or frightened off.
Forest Protectors. Sprites build little villages in the
boughs of trees and willing treants, in verdant glades
brightened by moss, wild flowers, and toadstools. Wild
nature thrives, and the sprites allow no trespassers.
When intruders are spotted, the sprites lead them astray
with ominous rustling from the bushes and distant
snapping twigs. Creatures foolish enough to persist in
intruding on a sprite's territory are stung with poisoned
arrows and lulled into a senseless sleep. While they
slumber, the sprites make good their escape, retreating
to an even more secluded area of the forest.
Heart Seers. Sprites can sense whether a creature
is good or evil by the sound and feeling of its beating
heart. Weighing the balance of a creature's past actions,
a sprite can tell whether its heart beats rapidly in love
or flags in sorrow, or whether it is darkened by hate or
greed. The sprite's power to perceive the heart always
shows the truth, because the heart can't lie.
Poison Brewers. In their forest domains, sprites brew
toxins, unguents, antidotes, and poisons, including the
sleep poison with which they coat their arrows. They
venture far into the woods to harvest rare flowers,
mosses, and fungi, sometimes crossing dangerous
territory to do so. If desperate, sprites even steal their
ingredients from the gardens of hags.
Good-Hearted. Because they are judges of the heart
and favor good creatures, sprites oppose the will of evil
fey and pledge to thwart evil archfey at every turn. If
they encounter adventurers on a quest to rid their forest
of an evil fey creature or goblinoid menace, they will
pledge their support and even come to their aid when
the adventurers least expect it.
Unlike pixies, sprites rarely indulge in frivolous
merriment and fun. They are firm warriors, protectors,
and judges, and their stern bent causes other fey to
consider them overly dour and serious. However, fey
that respect the sprites' territory find them staunch
allies in times of trouble.
-The tree had a we, v.llage nestled in its boughs, I swear.
*EKT TH.NG I KNEW, I WAS LY.nJ FACE-DOWN ,N THE O.RT. Mv
HEAD WAS FULL OF STARS, AN#HEN I STOOD UP AN   LOOKED
AROUND, BOTH THE TREE AN* THE WEE VILLAGE WERE GONE.
-Tale of a half-orc ranger
Sprite
Tiny fey, neutral good
Armor Class IS-(leather armor)
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)      18 (+4)     10 (+0)     14 (+2)     13 (+1)     11 (+0)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions___________________________
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 slashing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack:+6 to hit, range 40/160
ft., one target. Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must
succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or become
poisoned for 1 minute. If its saving throw result is 5 or lower,
the poisoned target falls unconscious for the same duration,
or until it takes damage or another creature takes an action to
shake it awake.
Heart Sight. The sprite touches a creature and magically knows
the creature's current emotional state. If the target fails a DC
10 Charisma saving throw, the sprite also knows the creature's
alignment. Celestials, fiends, and undead automatically fail the
saving throw.
Invisibility. The sprite magically turns invisible until it
attacks or casts a spell, or until its concentration ends (as if
concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the sprite wears or
carries is invisible with it.
vfiv

283
!!.     II
wr
Stirge
This horrid flying creature looks like a cross between
a large bat and an oversized mosquito. Its legs end
in sharp pincers, and its long, needle-like proboscis
slashes the air as it seeks its next meal.
Stirges feed on the blood of living creatures, attaching
and draining them slowly. Although they pose little
danger in small numbers, packs of stirges can be
a formidable threat, reattaching as quickly as their
weakening prey can pluck them off.
Blood Drain. A stirge attacks by landing on a victim,
finding a vulnerable spot, and plunging its proboscis
into the flesh while using its pincer legs to latch on to the
victim. Once the stirge has sated itself, it detaches and
flies off to digest its meal.
=
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 2 (1d4)
Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
4 (-3)       16 (+3)     11 (+0)      2 (-4)      8 (-1)       6 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
^
Blood Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage, and the stirge
attaches to the target. While attached, the stirge doesn't
attack. Instead, at the start of each of the stirge's turns, the
target loses 5 (ld4 + 3) hit points due to blood loss.
The stirge can detach itself by spending 5 feet of its
movement. It does so after it drains 10 hit points of blood from
the target or the target dies. A creature, including the target,
can use its action to detach the stirge.
Sugcu^us/IncubIjs
Succubi and incubi inhabit all of the Lower Planes,
and the lascivious dark-winged fiends can be found in
service to devils, demons, night hags, rakshasas, and
yugoloths. Asmodeus, ruler of the Nine Hells, uses
these fiends to tempt mortals to perform evil acts. The
demon lord Graz'zt keeps succubi and incubi as advisers
and consorts.
Though legend speaks of them separately, any
succubus can become an incubus, and vice versa. Most
of these fiends do have a preference for one form or the
other. Mortals only rarely see a succubus or incubus in
its true form, however, for the fiend typically begins its
corruption in veiled, insidious ways.
Beautiful Corrupters. A succubus or incubus first
appears in ethereal form, passing through walls like
a ghost to lurk next to a mortal's bedside and whisper
forbidden pleasures. Sleeping victims are tempted to
give in to their darkest desires, indulge in taboos, and
feed forbidden appetites. As the fiend fills the victim's
dreams with debauched images, the victim becomes
more susceptible to temptation in everyday life.
Inevitably, the fiend enters the mortal realm in
tempting form to directly influence a creature's
actions. Appearing in the guise of a humanoid who has
previously appeared only in the victim's dreams, the
succubus or incubus seduces or befriends its victim,
indulging all its desires so that it performs evil acts of its
own free will.
A mortal bequeaths its soul to the fiend not by formal
pledge or contract. Instead, when a succubus or incubus
has corrupted a creature completely—some say by
causing the victim to commit the three betrayals of
thought, word, and deed—the victim's soul belongs
to the fiend. The more virtuous the fiend's prey, the
longer the corruption takes, but the more rewarding
the downfall. After successfully corrupting a victim,
the succubus or incubus kills it, and the tainted soul
descends into the Lower Planes.
The succubus or incubus resorts to charming a victim
magically only when necessary, usually as a form of
self-defense. A charmed creature isn't responsible
for its actions, so forcing it to behave against its will
won't bring the fiend closer to the ultimate prize: the
victim's soul.
Deadly Kiss. The kiss of a succubus or incubus is an
echo of the emptiness that is the fiend's longing for a
corrupted soul. Likewise, the recipient of the fiend's kiss
gains no satisfaction from it, experiencing only pain and
the profound emptiness that the fiend imparts. The kiss
is nothing short of an attack, usually delivered as a final
farewell before the fiend escapes.
Fiendish Offspring. Succubi and incubi can
reproduce with one another to spawn more of their kind.
Less commonly, a succubus or incubus reproduces with
a humanoid. From this unholy union, a cambion child is
conceived. Invariably, the fiendish offspring is as wicked
as its fiendish parent.
5*84
Suggubus/Ingubus
Medium fiend (shapechanger), neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 66 (12d8 t-12)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS        CHA
8(-l)       17 (+3)     13 (+1)      IS (+2)     12 (+1)     20 (+5)
Skills Deception +9, Insight +5, Perception +5, Persuasion +9,
Stealth +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning, poison; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Telepathic Bond. The fiend ignores the range restriction on its
telepathy when communicating with a creature it has charmed.
The two don't even need to be on the same plane of existence.
I Shapechanger. The fiend can use its action to polymorph
into a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form.
Without wings, the fiend loses its flying speed. Other than its
size and speed, its statistics are the same in each form. Any
equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts
, to its true form if it dies.
i   ':■ ■■  "   •- i"   "'   .'    ,.n.   .'  m,           '    '    .u ^-.'l^1"! JJ               >>-»._ ww
Claw (Fiend Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach
5 ft., ohe target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Charm. One humanoid the fiend can see within 30 feet of it
must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be magically
charmed for 1 day. The charmed target obeys the fiend's verbal
or telepathic commands. If the target suffers any harm or
receives a suicidal command, it can repeat the saving throw,
ending the effect on a success. If the target successfully saves
against the effect, or if the effect on it ends, the target is
immune to this fiend's Charm for the next 24 hours.
The fiend can have only one target charmed at a time. If it
charms another, the effect on the previous target ends.
Draining Kiss. The fiend kisses a creature charmed by it or a
willing creature. The target must make a DC 15 Constitution       !
saving throw against this magic, taking 32 (5dl0 + 5) psychic
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. The target's hit point maximum is reduced by
an amount equal to the damage taken. This reduction lasts
until the target finishes a long rest. The target dies if this effect
reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
Etherealness. The fiend magically enters the Ethereal Plane
from the Material Plane, or vice versa.
—
3SE
____I
<r
a85
mi     ll
Tarrasque
The legendary tarrasque is possibly the most dreaded
monster of the Material Plane. It is widely believed that
only one of these creatures exists, though no one can
predict where and when it will strike.
A scaly biped, the tarrasque is fifty feet tall and
seventy feet long, weighing hundreds of tons. It carries
itself like a bird of prey, leaning forward and using its
powerful lashing tail for balance. Its cavernous maw
yawns wide enough to swallow all but the largest
fTARRASQTJE
F Gargantuan monstrosity (titan), unaligned
-. Armor Class 25 (natural armor)
I Hit Points 676 (33d20 + 330)
; Speed 40 ft.
,
STR
30 (+10)
DEX        CON
11 (+0)    30 (+10)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
n (+o)
CHA
11 (+0)
; Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +9, Cha +9
: Damage Immunities fire, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmaglcal weapons
1 Condition Immunities charmed, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
1 Senses bllndsight 120 ft., passive Perception 10
~j Languages —
I Challenge 30 (155,000 XP)
! Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the tarrasque fails a saving
;' throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The tarrasque has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Reflective Carapace. Any time the tarrasque is targeted by a
magic missile spell, a line spell, or a spell that requires a ranged
j attack roll, roll a d6. On a 1 to 5, the tarrasque is unaffected.
', On a 6, the tarrasque is unaffected, and the effect is reflected
back at the caster as though it originated from the tarrasque,
I turning the caster into the target.
Siege Monster. The tarrasque deals double damage to objects
I and structures.
Actions
Multiattack. The tarrasque can use its Frightful Presence, it
then makes five attacks: one with its bite, two with its claws,
one with its horns, and one with its tail. It can use its Swallow
instead of its bite.
creatures, and so great is its hunger that it can devour
the populations of whole towns.
Legendary Destruction. The destructive potential of
the tarrasque is so vast that some cultures incorporate
the monster into religious doctrine, weaving its sporadic
appearance into stories of divine judgment and wrath.
Legends tell how the tarrasque slumbers in its secret
lair beneath the earth, remaining in a dormant state for
decades or centuries. When it awakens in answer to
some inscrutable cosmic call, it rises from the depths to
obliterate everything in its path.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 28 (4d8 + 10) slashing damage.
Horns. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 32 (4dl0 + 10) piercing damage.
To/7. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 24 (4d6 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the tarrasque's choice
within 120 feet of it and aware of it must succeed on a DC
17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 minute.
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of
its turns, with disadvantage if the tarrasque is within line of
sight, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a creature's
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the creature   1
is immune to the tarrasque's Frightful Presence for the
next 24 hours.
Swallow. The tarrasque makes one bite attack against a Large
or smaller creature it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target
takes the bite's damage, the target is swallowed, and the
grapple ends. While swallowed, the creature is blinded and
restrained, it has total cover against attacks and other effects
outside the tarrasque, and it takes 56 (16d6) acid damage at
the start of each of the tarrasque's turns.
If the tarrasque takes 60 damage or more on a single turn
from a creature inside it, the tarrasque must succeed on a
DC 20 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or
regurgitate all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a
space within 10 feet of the tarrasque. If the tarrasque dies, a
swallowed creature is no longer restrained by it and can escape
from the corpse by using 30 feet of movement, exiting prone.
Legendary Actions___________________
The tarrasque can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
tarrasque regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
I Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
I Hit: 36 (4d12 + 10) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
I it is grappled (escape DC 20). Until this grapple ends, the
I target is restrained, and the tarrasque can't bite another target.

Attack. The tarrasque makes one claw attack or tail attack.
Move. The tarrasque moves up to half its speed.
Chomp (Costs 2 Actions). The tarrasque makes one bite attack or
uses its Swallow.
flfltaifafr."
386

tS.&tJE
w
s$?
i     i
Thri-kreen
Thri-kreen wander the deserts and savannas of the
world, avoiding all other races.
Thri-Kreen Communication. Thri-kreen employ
•a language without words. To show emotion and
reaction, a thri-kreen clacks its mandibles and waves its
antennae, giving other thri-kreen a sense of what it is
thinking and feeling. Other creatures find this manner
of communication difficult to interpret and impossible
to duplicate.
When forced to interact with creatures of other
intelligent species, thri-kreen employ alternative
methods of communication, such as drawing pictures in
sand or making pictures out of twigs or blades of grass.
Limited Emotions. Thri-kreen experience the full
range of emotions but aren't as prone to emotional
outbursts as humans. Thri-kreen with psionic
ability often demonstrate a wider range of emotions,
particularly if they live near or interact with humans or
other highly emotional creatures.
Isolationists and Wanderers. Thri-kreen consider
all other living creatures as potential nourishment, and
they love the taste of elf flesh in particular. If a creature
might be useful for something other than food, the thri-
kreen aren't likely to attack it on sight. Thri-kreen kill to
survive, never for sport.
Sleepless. Thri-kreen don't require sleep and can rest
while remaining alert and performing light tasks. Their
inability to sleep is thought to be the reason why thri-
kreen have such short lifespans, the average thri-kreen
life expectancy being only thirty years.
Variant: Thri-kreen Weapons and Psionics
Some thri-kreen employ special martial weapons. A gythka is
a two-handed polearm with a blade at each end. A chatkcha
is a flat, triangular wedge with three serrated blades (a light
thrown weapon).
A thri-kreen armed with a gythka and chatkchas gains the
following action options:
Multiattack. The thri-kreen makes two gythka attacks or
two chatkcha attacks.
Gythka. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) slashing damage.
Chatkcha. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) slashing damage.
A few thri-kreen manifest psionic abilities, using their powers
to aid the hunt and communicate more easily with outsiders.
A psionic thri-kreen has telepathy out to a range of 60 feet
and gains the following additional trait:
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The thri-kreen's innate
spellcasting ability is Wisdom. The thri-kreen can innately
cast the following spells, requiring no components:
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible)
2/day each: blur, magic weapon
1/day: invisibility (self only)
Thri-kreen
Medium humanoid (thri-kreen), chaotic neutral
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 40 ft.
j*»".....'
STR           DEX        CON
12 (+1)      15 (+2)     13 (+1)
INT
8(-1)
WIS
12 (+1)
CHA
7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4, Survival +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Thri-kreen
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Chameleon Carapace. The thri-kreen can change the color of
its carapace to match the color and texture of its surroundings.
As a result, it has advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks
made to hide.
Standing Leap. The thri-kreen's long jump is up to 30 feet and
its high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start.
Actions___________________________
Multiattack. The thri-kreen makes two attacks: one with its
I bite and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage, and the target must succeed
I on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1
minute. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target is also
paralyzed while poisoned in this way. The poisoned target can
repeat the saving throw on each of its turns, ending the effect
on itself on a success.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage.
s88
THR1-K.REKN
Treant
Treants are awakened trees that dwell in ancient
forests. Although treants prefer to while away the days,
months, and years in quiet contemplation, they fiercely
protect their woodland demesnes from outside threats.
The Sleeping Tree Awakens. A tree destined to
become a treant meditates through a long cycle of
seasons, living normally for decades or centuries before
realizing its potential. Trees that awaken do so only
under special circumstances and in places steeped
with nature's magic. Treants and powerful druids can
sense when a tree has the spark of potential, and they
protect such trees in secret groves as they draw near the
moment of their awakening. During the long process of
awakening, a tree acquires face-like features in its bark,
a division of the lower trunk into legs, and long branches
bending downward to serve as its arms. When it is
ready, the tree pulls its legs free from the clutching earth
and joins its fellows in protecting its woodland home.
Legendary Guardians. After a treant awakens, it
continues to grow exactly as it did when it was a tree.
Treants created from the mightiest trees can reach great
sizes while developing an innate magical power over
plants and animals. Such treants can animate plants,
using.them to ensnare and trap intruders. They can. call
wild creatures to aid them or carry messages across
great distances.
Protectors of the Wild. Even after awakening,
a treant spends much of its time living as a tree.
While rooted in place, a treant remains aware of
its surroundings, and can perceive the effects of
events taking place miles away based on subtle
changes nearby.
Woodcutters who avoid culling healthy living trees
and hunters who take only what they need of the forest's
bounty are unlikely to arouse a treant's ire. Creatures
careless with fire, those who poison the forest, and
those who destroy great trees, especially a tree close to
awakening, face the treant's wrath.
Huge plant, chaotic good
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 138 (12dl2 + 60)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)       8 (-1)       21 (+5)      12 (+1)      16 (+3)      12 (+1)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Druidic, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
False Appearance. While the treant remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a normal tree.
Siege Monster. The treant deals double damage to objects and
structures.
Actions
Multiattack. The treant makes two slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, range 60/180 ft., one
target. Hit: 28 (4dl0 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Animate Trees (1/Day). The treant magically animates one or
two trees it can see within 60 feet of it. These trees have the
same statistics as a treant, except they have Intelligence and
Charisma scores of 1, they can't speak, and they have only the
Slam action option. An animated tree acts as an ally of the
treant. The tree remains animate for 1 day or until it dies; until
the treant dies or is more than 120 feet from the tree; or until
the treant takes a bonus action to turn it back into an inanimate
tree. The tree then takes root if possible.
28g
Troglodyte
The savage, degenerate troglodytes squat in the shallow
depths of the Underdark in a constant state of war
against their neighbors and one another. They mark
the borders of their territories with cracked bones and
skulls, or with pictographs painted in blood or dung.
Perhaps the most loathsome of all humanoids,
troglodytes eat anything they can stomach. They dwell
in filth. The walls of their cavern homes are smeared
with grime, oily secretions, and the debris of their
foul feasting.
Simpleminded Brutes. Troglodytes have a simple,
communal culture devoted almost entirely to procuring
food. Too simple to plan more than a few days into the
future, troglodytes rely on constant raids and hunting
to survive. They take sadistic pleasure in hunting
"
"Smells
Lltt«NO»ci,
1
intelligent creatures weaker than themselves and show
no mercy toward those they capture and drag back to
their lairs to be devoured. The largest and toughest
troglodytes lead the hunt and become the leaders of
their tribes. However, if a leader shows any weakness or
hesitation, other troglodytes attack and eat it in a frenzy.
Troglodytes make little and build less, scavenging
their possessions from their prey. They understand
the value of metal weapons and armor, and fight
among one another for the right to have such items. A
troglodyte tribe might be torn apart by battles over a
single longsword.
Devotees of Laogzed. Some troglodytes venerate
Laogzed, a demonic, monstrously fat toad-lizard that
slumbers in the Abyss. Laogzed offers the troglodytes
nothing in return except aspiration, for it is the dream of
his troglodyte worshipers to become as fat, well-fed, and
wearily content as he seems to be.
Troglodyte
Medium humanoid (troglodyte), chaotic evil

Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      10 (+0)      14 (+2)       6 (-2)      10 (+0)      6 (-2)


E
Skills Stealth +2
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Troglodyte
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Chameleon Skin. The troglodyte has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide.
Stench. Any creature other than a troglodyte that starts its
turn within 5 feet of the troglodyte must succeed on a DC 12
Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the start of the
creature's next turn. On a successful saving throw, the creature
is immune to the stench of all troglodytes for 1 hour.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the troglodyte
has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The troglodyte makes three attacks: one with its
bite and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage.
!>-•—J-W
290
TJBO<|LODYTE
Troll
Born with horrific appetites, trolls eat anything they
can catch and devour. They have no society to speak
of, but they do serve as mercenaries to ores, ogres,
ettins, hags, and giants. As payment, trolls demand food
and treasure. Trolls are difficult to control, however,
doing as they please even when working with more
powerful creatures.
Regeneration. Smashing a troll's bones and slashing
through its rubbery hide only makes it angry. A troll's
wounds close quickly. If the monster loses an arm, a
leg, or even its head, those dismembered parts can
sometimes act with a life of their own. A troll can
even reattach severed body parts, untroubled by its
momentary disability. Only acid and fire can arrest
the regenerative properties of a troll's flesh. The trolls,
enraged, will attack individuals making acid and fire
attacks against them above all other prey.
Troll Freaks. Their regenerative capabilities make
trolls especially susceptible to mutation. Although
uncommon, such transformations can result from
what the troll has done or what has been done to it. A
decapitated troll might grow two heads from the stump
of its neck, while a troll that eats a fey creature might
gain one or more of that creature's traits.
M_______________________________________________k>
Variant: Loathsome Limbs
Some trolls have the following trait.
Loathsome Limbs. Whenever the troll takes at least 15
slashing damage at one time, roll a d20 to determine what
else happens to it:
1-10: Nothing else happens.
11-14: One leg is severed from the troll if it has any legs left.
15-18: One arm is severed from the troll if it has
any arms left.
19-20: The troll is decapitated, but the troll dies only if it
can't regenerate. If it dies, so does the severed head.
If the troll finishes a short or long rest without reattaching
a severed limb or head, the part regrows. At that point,
the severed part dies. Until then, a severed part acts on
the troll's initiative and has its own action and movement.
A severed part has AC 13,10 hit points, and the troll's
Regeneration trait.
A severed leg is unable to attack and has a speed of 5 feet.
A severed arm has a speed of 5 feet and can make one claw
attack on its turn, with disadvantage on the attack roll unless
the troll can see the arm and its target. Each time the troll
loses an arm, it loses a claw attack.
If its head is severed, the troll loses its bite attack and its
body is blinded unless the head can see it. The severed head
has a speed of 0 feet and the troll's Keen Smell trait. It can
make a bite attack but only against a target in its space.
The troll's speed is halved if it's missing a leg. If it loses
both legs, it falls prone. If it has both arms, it can crawl.
With only one arm, it can still crawl, but its speed is halved.
With no arms or legs, its speed is 0, and it can't benefit from
bonuses to speed.
\
Troll
Large giant, chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 84 (8dl0 +40)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      13 (+1)      20 (+5)       7 (-2)       9 (-1)        7 (-2)
Skills Perception +1
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Giant
Challenge5 (1,800 XP)
Keen Smell. The troll has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Regeneration. The troll regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn. If the troll takes acid or fire damage, this trait doesn't
function at the start of the troll's next turn. The troll dies only if
it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate.
Actions____________________________
Multiattack. The troll makes three attacks: one with its bite
and two with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
I
«9i
r 11     I
T«UMTTH,NGlWMeM««.
^  Iaso^woR-s-coo-o;
AN UMBER HULK ATTACK
Umber Hulk
t Umber Hulk
V Large monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class IS (natural armor)
Hit Points 93 (lldlO + 33)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft.
STR
20 (+5)
DEX         CON
13 (+1)      16 (+3)
INT
9(-l)
WIS          CHA
10 (+0)     10 (+0)
Senses darkvision 120 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 10
Languages Umber Hulk
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Confusing Caze. When a creature starts its turn within 30 feet
of the umber hulk and is able to see the umber hulk's eyes, the
umber hulk can magically force it to make a DC 15 Charisma
saving throw, unless the umber hulk is incapacitated.
On a failed saving throw, the creature can't take reactions
until the start of its next turn and rolls a d8 to determine
what it does during that turn. On a 1 to 4, the creature does
An abominable horror from deep beneath the earth, an
umber hulk burrows into cave complexes, dungeons, or
Underdark settlements in search of food. Those lucky
enough to survive an umber hulk attack often remember
precious little of the incident, thanks to the umber hulk's
mind-scrambling gaze.
Devious Delvers. Umber hulks can burrow through
solid rock, forming new tunnels in their wake. The
steel-hard chitin of its body can withstand the cave-ins,
tunnel collapses, and rock falls that commonly follow it.
Burrowing into the wall of a cavern or passageway,
an umber hulk lies in wait for creatures to pass by
on the other side, its hair-like feelers sensing any
movement around it. When it explodes out in a shower
of earth and rock, its unsuspecting quarry turns to face
the oncoming threat—and is entranced by the umber
hulk's bewildering eyes, forced to stand helpless as its
mandibles snap shut.
Mind Scrambler. Many survivors of an umber hulk
encounter recollect little about the attack, because the
monster's confusing gaze scrambles their memory of
the event. Those who have fought and killed umber
hulks recognize the signs. For other denizens of
the Underdark, grisly tales of vanished explorers
»    and wanton destruction speak of an unknown
foe. Umber hulks take on supernatural status
in these harrowing stories, many of which
convey the same warning: once an umber
hulk has been spotted, it is already too late
to escape it.
nothing. On a 5 or 6, the creature takes no action but uses all
its movement to move fn a random direction. On a 7 or 8, the
creature makes one melee attack against a random creature, or
it does nothing if no creature is within reach.
Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the
saving throw at the start of its turn. If the creature does so, it
can't seethe umber hulk until the start of its next turn, when it
can avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at the umber hulk
in the meantime, it must immediately make the save.
Tunneler. The umber hulk can burrow through solid rock at
half its burrowing speed and leaves a 5 foot-wide, 8-foot-high
tunnel in its wake.
Actions
Multiattack. The umber hulk makes three attacks: two with its
claws and one with its mandibles.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) slashing damage.
Mandibles. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage.
1
393
UMBER HULK


^WPWP

UNICORN
Unicorns dwell in enchanted forests. Unrelated to the
horses it resembles, a unicorn is a celestial creature
that wanders sylvan realms, its white form glimmering
like starlight.
A unicorn's brow sports a single spiraling horn
of ivory whose magical touch can heal the sick and
the injured. Its ears catch the words and whispers
of the creatures that share its domain, and it knows
the tongues of elves and sylvan folk. Unicorns allow
good-hearted creatures to enter their woods to hunt or
gather food, but they hold evil ever at bay. Foul-hearted
creatures seldom leave a unicorn's domain alive.
Divine Guardians. Good deities placed unicorns on
the Material Plane to ward away evil and preserve and
protect sacred places. Most unicorns protect a bounded
realm such as an enchanted forest. However, the gods
sometimes send a unicorn to guard sacred artifacts or
protect specific creatures. When the forces of darkness
strike against an individual the gods wish to protect,
they might send that individual to a unicorn's forest,
where evil creatures pursue at their peril.
Unicorns most often serve deities of the forest and
woodlands, including the gods of benevolent fey.
Although all unicorns have natural healing power,
some serve the gods in greater capacities, performing
miracles normally reserved for high priests.
Forest Lords. A unicorn's forest is a celestial realm
where nothing that occurs beneath the sun-dappled
leaves escapes the creature's notice. A unicorn hears
each breathy tune sung by the elves that reside amid
the treetops. It senses where every caterpillar spins
its cocoon, each leaf and branch upon which a bright
butterfly rests its tired wings.
In a unicorn's forest, a sense of calm pervades. From
wolves and foxes to birds, squirrels, and tiny insects,
the creatures of a unicorn's domain seem quite tame.
Pixies, sprites, satyrs, dryads, and other normally
mercurial fey loyally serve a unicorn when they
dwell within its woods. Under a unicorn's protection,
creatures feel safe from the threat of encroaching
civilization and the insidious spread of evil.
A unicorn roams its domain constantly, moving ever
so carefully so as not to disturb other denizens. A
creature might catch a passing glimpse of the unicorn
then suddenly see nothing but the wild woods.
*V
Sacred Horns. A unicorn's horn is the focus of its
power, a shard of divine magic wrought in spiraling
ivory. Wands of unicorn horn channel powerful magic,
while unicorn horn weapons strike with divine force.
Wizards can work powdered unicorn horn into potent
potions and scroll ink, or use it as a component in
eldritch rituals. However, any creature that takes a role,
no matter how small, in slaying a unicorn is likely to
become the target of divine retribution.
Blessed Mounts. When darkness and evil threaten
to overwhelm the mortal world, the gods sometimes
see fit to pair a unicorn mount with a champion, At
paladin astride a unicorn is a sign of the gods' direct
intervention in the affairs of the mortal realm. It is a
holy alliance made to cleave the heads from demons and
banish devils back to the Nine Hells.
As long as the troubled times of darkness persist,
the unicorn stays by the champion, its horn shining
brightly to drive back the night. However, if the gods'
champion falls from grace or turns from the cause
of righteousness and good, the unicorn departs,
never to return.
A Unicorn's Lair________________
A unicorn's lair might be an ancient ruin overgrown
with vines, a misty clearing surrounded by mighty oaks,
a flower-covered hilltop alive with butterflies, or some
other serene woodland location.
Regional Effects
Transformed by the creature's celestial presence, the
domain of a unicorn might include any of the following
magical effects:
•  Open flames of a nonmagical nature are extinguished
within the unicorn's domain. Torches and campfires
refuse to burn, but closed lanterns are unaffected.
•  Creatures native to the unicorn's domain have an eas-
ier time hiding; they have advantage on all Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide.
•  When a good-aligned creature casts a spell or uses
a magical effect that causes another good-aligned
creature to regain hit points, the target regains the
maximum number of hit points possible for the
spell or effect.
•  Curses affecting any good-aligned creature
are suppressed.
If the unicorn dies, these effects end immediately.
Unicorn
Large celestial, lawful good
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 67 (9dl0 +18)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      14 (+2)      15 (+2)      11 (+0)     17 (+3)      16 (+3)
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Celestial, Elvish, Sylvan, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Charge. If the unicorn moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a horn attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Innate Spellcasting. The unicorn's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The unicorn can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no components:
At will: detect evil and good, druidcraft, pass without trace
I 1/day each: calm emotions, dispel evil and good, entangle
Magic Resistance. The unicorn has advantage on saving throws
| against spells and other magical effects.
I Magic Weapons. The unicorn's weapon attacks are magical.
Multiattack. The unicorn makes two attacks: one with its
hooves and one with its horn.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Horn. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.
Healing Touch (3/Day). The unicorn touches another creature
with its horn. The target magically regains 11 (2d8 + 2) hit
points. In addition, the touch removes all diseases and
neutralizes all poisons afflicting the target.
Teleport (1/Day). The unicorn magically teleports itself and up
to three willing creatures it can see within 5 feet of it, along
with any equipment they are wearing or carrying, to a location
the unicorn is familiar with, up to 1 mile away.
Legendary Actions____________________
The unicorn can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
unicorn regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Hooves. The unicorn makes one attack with its hooves.
Shimmering Shield (Costs 2 Actions). The unicorn creates a
shimmering, magical field around itself or another creature it
can see within 60 feet of it. The target gains a +2 bonus to AC
until the end of the unicorn's next turn.
Heal Self (Costs 3 Actions). The unicorn magically regains 11
(2d8 + 2) hit points.
294
yNi(?i0RN

J
Vampires
Awakened to an endless night, vampires hunger for
the life they have lost and sate that hunger by drinking
the blood of the living. Vampires abhor sunlight, for
its touch burns them. They never cast shadows or
reflections, and any vampire wishing to move unnoticed
among the living keeps to the darkness and far from
reflective surfaces.
Dark Desires. Whether or not a vampire retains
any memories from its former life, its emotional
attachments wither as once-pure feelings become
twisted by undeath. Love turns into hungry
obsession, while friendship becomes bitter
jealousy. In place of emotion, vampires pursue
physical symbols of what they crave, so that a
vampire seeking love might fixate on a young beauty.
A child might become an object of fascination for a
vampire obsessed with youth and potential. Others
surround themselves with art, books, or sinister items
such as torture devices or trophies from creatures
they have killed.
Born from Death. Most of a vampire's victims
become vampire spawn—ravenous creatures with a
vampire's hunger for blood, but under the control of
the vampire that created them. If a true vampire allows
a spawn to draw blood from its own body, the spawn
transforms into a true vampire no longer under its
master's control. Few vampires are willing to relinquish
their control in this manner. Vampire spawn become
free-willed when their creator dies.
Chained to the Grave. Every vampire remains bound
to its coffin, crypt, or grave site, where it must rest by
day. If a vampire didn't receive a formal burial, it must
lie beneath a foot of earth at the place of its transition
to undeath. A vampire can move its place of burial by
transporting its coffin or a significant amount of grave
dirt to another location. Some vampires set up multiple
resting places this way.
Undead Nature. Neither a vampire nor a vampire
spawn requires air.                                    ^^^^^
,   ., The LAN°'Mv
MftMTHEANce-.l^T;EE0AttKNessorTHe
Player Characters as Vampires
The game statistics of a player character
transformed into a vampire spawn and then a
vampire don't change, except that the character's Strength,
Dexterity, and Constitution scores become 18 if they aren't
higher. In addition, the character gains the vampire's damage
resistances, darkvision, traits, and actions. Attack and
damage rolls for the vampire's attacks are based on Strength.
The save DC for Charm is 8 + the vampire's proficiency
bonus + the vampire's Charisma modifier. The character's
alignment becomes lawful evil, and the DM might take
control of the character until the vampirism is reversed with
a wish spell or the character is killed and brought back to life.
295
miff  n
NS~<.
>¥?rx<um»
Strahd von Zarovich
A brilliant thinker and capable warrior in life, Strahd von
Zarovich fought in countless battles for his people. When war
and killing finally stripped him of his youth and strength, he
settled in the remote valley of Barovia and built a castle on
a towering pinnacle, from which he could survey his lands.
His brother Sergei came to live with him in Castle Ravenloft,
becoming Strahd's adviser and constant companion.
In his brother, Strahd saw everything he had lost. Sergei
was handsome and young, while Strand had become old and
scarred. Resentment colored their relationship, eventually
turning into hatred. Strahd's beloved, Tatyana, spurned him
for Sergei, whom she pledged to marry.
In a desperate attempt to win Tatyana's heart, Strahd
forged a pact with dark powers that made him immortal.
At the wedding of Sergei and Tatyana, he confronted his
brother and killed him. Tatyana fled and flung herself from
Ravenloft's walls. Strahd's guards, seeing him for a monster,
shot him with arrows. But he did not die. He became a
vampire—the first vampire, according to many sages.
In the centuries since his transformation, Strahd's lust for
life and youth have only grown. He broods in his dark castle,
cursing the living for stealing away what he lost, and never
admitting his hand in the tragedy he created.
VAMPlKES
A Vampire's Lair
A vampire chooses a grand yet defensible location for its
lair, such as a castle, fortified manor, or walled abbey. It
hides its coffin in an underground crypt or vault guarded
by vampire spawn or other loyal creatures of the night.
Regional Effects
The region surrounding a vampire's lair is warped by
the creature's unnatural presence, creating any of the
following effects:
•  There's a noticeable increase in the populations of
bats, rats, and wolves in the region.
•  Plants within 500 feet of the lair wither, and their
stems and branches become twisted and thorny.
•  Shadows cast within 500 feet of the lair seem abnor-
mally gaunt and sometimes move as though alive.
•  A creeping fog clings to the ground within 500 feet
of the vampire's lair. The fog occasionally takes eerie
forms, such as grasping claws and writhing serpents.
If the vampire is destroyed, these effects end
after 2d6 days.
J
'Vampire
Medium undead (shapechanger), lawful evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 144 (17d8 +68)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      18 (+4)     18 (+4)      17 (+3)     15 (+2)     18 (+4)
i Saving Throws Dex +9, Wis +7, Cha +9
Skills Perception +7, Stealth +9
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 13(10,000 XP)
Shapechanger. If the vampire isn't in sunlight or running water,
it can use its action to polymorph into a Tiny bat or a Medium
cloud of mist, or back into its true form.
While in bat form, the vampire can't speak, its walking speed
is 5 feet, and it has a flying speed of 30 feet. Its statistics, other
i than its size and speed, are unchanged. Anything it is wearing
| transforms with it, but nothing it is carrying does. It reverts to
its true form if it dies.
While in mist form, the vampire can't take any actions, speak,
or manipulate objects. It is weightless, has a flying speed of 20
feet, can hover, and can enter a hostile creature's space and
stop there. In addition, if air can pass through a space, the mist
can do so without squeezing, and it can't pass through water. It
has advantage on Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution saving
throws, and it is immune to all nonmagical damage, except the
damage it takes from sunlight.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the vampire fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Misty Escape. When it drops to 0 hit points outside its resting
place, the vampire transforms into a cloud of mist (as in the
Shapechanger trait) instead of falling unconscious, provided
that it isn't in sunlight or running water. If it can't transform, it
is destroyed.
While it has 0 hit points in mist form, it can't revert to its
vampire form, and it must reach its resting place within 2
hours or be destroyed. Once in its resting place, it reverts to
its vampire form. It is then paralyzed until it regains at least 1
hit point. After spending 1 hour in its resting place with 0 hit
points, it regains 1 hit point.
Regeneration. The vampire regains 20 hit points at the start
of its turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn't in sunlight or
running water. If the vampire takes radiant damage or damage
from holy water, this trait doesn't function at the start of the
vampire's next turn.
Spider Climb. The vampire can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check. -
Vampire Weaknesses. The vampire has the following flaws:
toibidddnce. The vampire can't enter a residence without an
invitation from one of the occupants.
:^
-■^-'
-■^--^.■.TS^^   —-.       •■ L1|W-|      '•
Harmed by Running Water. The vampire takes 20 acid damage
if it ends its turn in running water.
Stake to the Heart. If a piercing weapon made of wood
is driven into the vampire's heart while the vampire is
incapacitated in its resting place, the vampire is paralyzed until .
the stake is removed.
Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The vampire takes 20 radiant
damage when it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, it   I
has disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
Actions'
Multiattack (Vampire Form Only). The vampire makes two
attacks, only one of which can be a bite attack.
Unarmed Strike (Vampire Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack:
+9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) bludgeoning
damage. Instead of dealing damage, the vampire can grapple
the target (escape DC 18).
Bite (Bat or Vampire Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +9
to hit, reach 5 ft., one willing creature, or a creature that is
grappled by the vampire, incapacitated, or restrained. Hit: 7
(ld6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) necrotic damage. The   I
target's hit point maximum is reduced by an amount equal to
the necrotic damage taken, and the vampire regains hit points
equal to that amount. The reduction lasts until the target
finishes a long rest. The target dies if this effect reduces its hit
point maximum to 0. A humanoid slain in this way and then
buried in the ground rises the following night as a vampire
spawn under the vampire's control.
Charm. The vampire targets one humanoid it can see within
30 feet of it. If the target can see the vampire, the target must
succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw against this magic
or be charmed by the vampire. The charmed target regards
the vampire as a trusted friend to be heeded and protected.
Although the target isn't under the vampire's control, it takes
the vampire's requests or actions in the most favorable way it
can, and it is a willing target for the vampire's bite attack.
Each time the vampire or the vampire's companions do
anything harmful to the target, it can repeat the saving throw,
ending the effect on itself on a success. Otherwise, the
effect lasts 24 hours or until the vampire is destroyed, is on a
different plane of existence than the target, or takes a bonus
action to end the effect.
Children of the Night (I/Day). The vampire magically calls 2d4
swarms of bats or rats, provided that the sun isn't up. While
outdoors, the vampire can call 3d6 wolves instead. The called
creatures arrive in ld4 rounds, acting as allies of the vampire
and obeying its spoken commands. The beasts remain for 1
hour, until the vampire dies, or until the vampire dismisses
them as a bonus action.
Legendary Actions________________t
The vampire can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can beUsed
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
vampire regains-spent legendary actions at the start of Jts Wn..
Move. The vampire moves up to its speed without pfdypj^jj:
opportunity attacks.
Unarmed Strike. The.vampire makes, 6ne unarmed strike.
Bite (Costs 2 Actions). The vanfpire makes one bite attack.
.••ujatro;
gJ*^". >
----
1     ^F
297
Variants: Vampire Warriors and Spellcasters
Some vampires have martial training and battlefield
experience. A warrior vampire wearing plate armor (AC
18) and wielding a greatsword has a challenge rating of 15
(13,000 XP) and the following additional action options:
Multiattack. The vampire makes two greatsword attacks.
Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Some vampires are practitioners of the arcane arts. A
spellcaster vampire spellcaster has a challenge rating of 15
(13,000 XP) and the following trait:
Spellcasting. The vampire is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 15, +7
to hit with spell attacks). The vampire has the following
wizard spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): mage hand, prestidigitation, ray of frost
1 st level (4 slots): comprehend languages, fog cloud, sleep
2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, gust of wind,
mirror image
3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, bestow curse, nondetection
4th level (3 slots): blight, greater invisibility
5th level (1 slot): dominate person
Vampire Spawn
Medium undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 82 (lld8 + 33)
Speed 30 ft.
\,       STR           DEX         CON
16 (+3)      16 (+3)      16 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)     10 (+0)      12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +3
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
| Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenges (1,800 XP)
Regeneration. The vampire regains 10 hit points at the start
of its turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn't in sunlight or
running water. If the vampire takes radiant damage or damage
from holy water, this trait doesn't function at the start of the
vampire's next turn.
Spider Climb. The vampire can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Vampire Weaknesses. The vampire has tlje'fo'llowing flaws:
Forbiddance. The vampire can't enter a residence without an
invitation from one of the occupants.
Harmed by Running Water. The vampire takes 20 acid damage
when it ends its turn in running water.
Stake to the Heart. The vampire is destroyed if a piercing
weapon made of wood is driven into its heart while it is
incapacitated in its resting place.
Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The vampire takes 20 radiant
damage when it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, it   I
has disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
Actions
Multiattack. The vampire makes two attacks, only one of which
can be a bite attack.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) slashing damage. Instead of dealing damage,
the vampire can grapple the target (escape DC 13).
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one willing
creature, or a creature that is grappled by the vampire,
incapacitated, or restrained. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage
plus 7 (2d6) necrotic damage. The target's hit point maximum
is reduced by an amount equal to the necrotic damage taken,
and the vampire regains hit points equal to that amount. The
reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The target
dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
398
VAMPIRES
^
*°°U T°   C6 TO P« «* *°UR Ure2N0 ROUS O,
Water Weird
A water weird is an elemental guardian bound to a,
specific water-filled location, such as a pool or fountain,-
Invisible while immersed in water, its serpentina shape.
becomes clear only when it emerges to attack.'Usjrig its
coils to crush any creature other than its summqtier and
those its summoner declares as off limits. When sl|in, a
water weird becomes an inanimate pool of water.
Good and Evil Weirds. Like most elementals, a
water weird has no concept of good or evil. However,
a water weird bound to a sacred or befouled source of
water begins to take on the nature of that site, becoming
neutral good or neutral evil.
A neutral good water weird tries to frighten away
interlopers rather than kill them, while a neutral evil
water weird kills its victims for pleasure and might
turn against its summoner. A water weird loses its evil
alignment if its waters are cleansed with a purify food
and drink spell.
Elemental Nature. A water weird doesn't require air,
food, drink, or sleep.
-  ■    -          - ■-             ; ,i
Water Weird
targe-elemental, neutral
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 58 (9dl0 + 9)
Speed 0 ft., swim 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      16 (+3)      13 (+1)      11 (+0)     10 (+0)     10 (+0)
Damage Resistances fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
poisoned, restrained, prone, unconscious
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands Aquan but doesn't speak
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Invisible in Water. The water weird is invisible while fully
immersed in water.
Water Bound. The water weird dies if it leaves the water to
which it is bound or if that water is destroyed.
Actions
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is
Medium or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 13) and pulled 5
feet toward the water weird. Until this grapple ends, the target
is restrained, the water weird tries to drown it, and the water
weird can't constrict another target.
iWRiKri
899
Wight
The word "wight" meant "person" in days of yore, but
the name now refers to evil undead who were once
mortals driven by dark desire and great vanity. When
death stills such a creature's heart and snuffs its living
breath, its spirit cries out to the demon lord Orcus or
some vile god of the underworld for a reprieve: undeath
in return for eternal war on the living. If a dark power
answers the call, the spirit is granted undeath so that it
can pursue its own malevolent agenda.
Wights possess the memories and drives of their
formerly living selves. They will heed the call of
whatever dark entity transformed them into undead,
swearing oaths to appease their new lord while
retaining their autonomy. Never tiring, a wight can
pursue its goals relentlessly and without distraction.
Life Eaters. Neither dead nor alive, a wight exists in a
transitional state between one world and the next. The
bright spark it possessed in life is gone, and in its place
is a yearning to consume that spark in all living things.
When a wight attacks, this life essence glows like white-
hot embers to its dark eyes, and the wight's cold touch
can drain the spark through flesh, clothing, and armor.
Shadow of the Grave. Wights flee from the world
by day, away from the light of the sun, which they hate.
They retreat to barrow mounds, crypts, and tombs
where they dwell. Their lairs are silent, desolate places,
surrounded by dead plants, noticeably blackened, and
avoided by bird and beast.
Humanoids slain by a wight can rise as zombies
under its control. Motivated by hunger for living souls
and driven by the same desire for power that awakened
them in undeath, some wights serve as shock troops
for evil leaders, including wraiths. As soldiers, they are
able to plan but seldom do so, relying on their hunger
for destruction to overwhelm any creature that stands
before them.
Undead Nature. A wight doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Wight
Medium undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 14 (studded leather)
Hit Points 45 (6d8 +18)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
15 (+2)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      16 (+3)
INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)     13 (+1)      15 (+2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the wight has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The wight makes two longsword attacks or
two longbow attacks. It can use its Life Drain in place of one
longsword attack.
Life Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) necrotic damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or its hit point
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken.
This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The
target dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
A humanoid slain by this attack rises 24 hours later as a
zombie under the wight's control, unless the humanoid is
restored to life or its body is destroyed. The wight can have no
more than twelve zombies under its control at one time.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) slashing damage, or 7 (ldlO + 2)
slashing damage if used with two hands.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft.
one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.

f>Al»+Mh&
.■HiW'N»WIMUJfc>^aw.jua
3^0
WIGHT
wL
!■'
WlLL-O'-WlSP
Tiny undeaa, chaotic evil

■
■
Armor Class 19
Hit Points 22 (9d4)
Speed 0 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover)
STR           DEX        CON           INT          WIS          CHA
1 (-5)       28 (+9)     10 (+0)      13 (+1)     14 (+2)     11 (+0)
Damage Immunities lightning, poison
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, necrotic,
thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical weapons
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Consume Life. As a bonus action, the will-o'-wisp can target
one creature it can see within 5 feet of it that hasO hit
points and is still alive. The target must succeed on a DC 10
Constitution saving throw against this magic or die. If the
target dies, the will-o'-wisp regains 10 (3d6) hit points.
Ephemeral. The will-o'-wisp can't wear or carry anything.
Incorporeal Movement. The will-o'-wisp can move through
other creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It
takes 5 (IdlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Variable Illumination. The will-o'-wisp sheds bright light in a 5-
to 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional number of feet
equal to the chosen radius. The will-o'-wisp can alter the radius
as a bonus action.
y
Actions
Shock. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 9 (2d8) lightning damage.
(Invisibility. The will-o'-wisp and its light magically become
invisible until it attacks or uses its Life Drain, or until its
jj concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell).
WlLL-O'-WlSP
Will-o'-wisps are malevolent, wispy balls of light that
haunt lonely places and battlefields, bound by dark fate
or dark magic to feed on fear and despair.
Hope and Doom. Will-o'-wisps look like bobbing
lantern lights in the distance, although they can choose
to alter their colors, or wink out completely. When they
activate their lights, will-o'-wisps offer hope, hinting of
safety to creatures that follow them.
Will-o'-wisps lure unwary creatures into quicksand
pits, monster lairs, and other dangerous places so
that they can feed on the suffering of their prey and
revel in their death screams. An evil being that falls
prey to a will-o'-wisp might become a wisp itself, its
woeful spirit coalescing above its lifeless corpse like a
flickering flame.
Consumed by Despair. Will-o'-wisps are the souls of
evil beings that perished in anguish or misery as they
wandered forsaken lands permeated with powerful
magic. They thrive in swampy bogs and bone-strewn
battlefields where the oppressive weight of sorrow
stoops even heavier than the low-hanging mist and
fog. Trapped in these desolate places of lost hope and
memory, will-o'-wisps lure other creatures toward
dismal fates and feed on their misery.
Agents of Evil. Will-o'-wisps rarely speak, but when
they do, their voices sound like faint or distant whispers.
In the miserable domains they haunt, will-o'-wisps
sometimes form symbiotic relationships with their
wicked neighbors. Hags, oni, black dragons, and evil
cultists work with will-o'-wisps to draw creatures into
ambush. As their evil allies surround and slaughter
creatures, the wisps hover above them, drinking the
agony of a last breath and savoring the sensation as the
light of life goes out in a creature's eyes.
UndeadNature. A will-o'-wisp doesn't require air,
drink, or sleep.
301
r    ii
Wraith
A wraith is malice incarnate, concentrated into an
incorporeal form that seeks to quench all life. The
creature is suffused with negative energy, and its
mere passage through the world leaves nearby plants
blackened and withered. Animals flee from its presence.
Even small fires can be extinguished by the sucking
oblivion of the wraith's horrifying existence.
Vile Oblivion. When a mortal humanoid lives a
debased life or enters into a fiendish pact, it consigns
its soul to eternal damnation in the Lower Planes.
However, sometimes the soul becomes so suffused with
negative energy that it collapses in on itself and ceases
to exist the instant before it can shuffle off to some
horrible afterlife. When this occurs, the spirit becomes a
soulless wraith—a malevolent void trapped on the plane
where it died. Almost nothing of the wraith's former
existence is preserved; in this new form, it exists only to
annihilate other life.
Bereft of Body. A wraith can move through solid
creatures and objects as easily as a mortal creature
moves through fog.
A wraith might retain a few memories of its mortal life
as shadowy echoes. However, even the strongest events
and emotions D'epome little more than faint impressions,
fleeting as half-remembered dreams. A wraith might
pause to stare at something that fascinated it in life,
or it might curb its wrath in acknowledgment of a
past friendship. Such moments come rarely, however,
because most wraiths despise what they were as a
reminder of what they have become.
Undead Commanders. A wraith can make an undead
servant from the spirit of a humanoid creature that has
recently suffered a violent death. Such a fragment of
woe becomes a specter, spiteful of all that lives.
Wraiths sometimes rule the legions of the dead,
plotting the doom of living creatures. When they emerge
from their tombs to do battle, life and hope shrivel
before them. Even if a wraith's armies are forced to
retreat, the lands its forces occupied are so blasted and
withered that those who live there often starve and die.
Undead Nature. A wraith doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
i—~
---u
~
•  -    - ■            -~i
Wraith
Medium undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27)
Speed 0 ft., fly 60 ft. (hover)
STR
6 (-2)
DEX
16 (+3)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
12 (+1)
WIS
14 (+2)
CHA
15 (+2)
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder;
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical
weapons that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Incorporeal Movement. The wraith can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(ldlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the wraith has
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Life Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 21 (4d8 + 3) necrotic damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or its hit point
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken. I
This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The
target dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
Create Specter. The wraith targets a humanoid within 10 feet
of it that has been dead for no longer than 1 minute and died
| violently. The target's spirit rises as a specter in the space of
its corpse or in the nearest unoccupied space. The specter is
under the wraith's control. The wraith can have no more than
seven specters under its control at one time.


3ba
-
Wyvern
Travelers in the wild sometimes look to the skies
to see the dark-winged shape of a wyvern carrying
its prey. These cousins to the great dragons hunt
the same tangled forests and caverns as their kin.
Their appearance sends ripples of alarm through the
borderlands of civilization.
A wyvern has two scaly legs, leathery wings, and a
sinewy tail topped with its most potent weapon: a poison
stinger. The poison in a wyvern's stinger can kill a
creature in seconds. Extremely potent, wyvern poison
burns through its victim's bloodstream, disintegrating
veins and arteries on its Way to the heart. As deadly
as wyverns can be, however, hunters and adventurers
often track them to claim the venom, which is used in
alchemical compounds and to coat weapons.
Aerial Hunters. A wyvern doesn't fight on the ground
unless it can't reach its prey by any other means, or
if it has been fooled into a position from which aerial
combat isn't an option. If forced into a confrontation on
the ground, a wyvern crouches low, keeping its stinger
poised above its head as it hisses and growls.
Aggressive and Reckless. A wyvern intent on its prey
backs down only if it sustains serious injury, or if its
prey eludes it long enough for another easier potential
meal to wander along. If it corners a fleeing creature in
an enclosure too small to enter, a wyvern guards where
the quarry hides, lashing with its stinger whenever
opportunity allows.
Although they possess more cunning than ordinary
beasts, wyverns lack the intelligence of their draconic
cousins. As such, creatures that maintain their
composure as a wyvern hunts them from the air can
often elude or trick it. Wyverns follow a direct path to
their prey, with no thought given to possible ambushes.
Tamed Wyverns. A wyvern can be tamed for use as
a mount, but doing so presents a difficult and deadly
challenge. Raising one as a hatchling offers the best
results. However, a wyvern's violent temperament has
cost the life of many a would-be master.
'   ?«&- ..
Wyvern
Large dragon, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 110 (I3dl0t 39)
Speed 20 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      10 (+0)      16 (+3)       5 (-3)       12 (+1)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The wyvern makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its stinger. While flying, it can use its claws in
place of one other attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. The target must
make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6)
■ poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
303

Xorn
Bizarre creatures native to the Elemental Plane of
Earth, xorn sniff out gemstones and precious metals,
then tunnel through earth and rock to consume
those treasures. On the Material Plane, xorn must
range far and wide through the Underdark to sustain
themselves, becoming aggressive toward miners and
treasure hunters when the valuable minerals of their
diet are scarce.
A xorn's unnatural origins are suggested by its
unusually heavy body and the large, powerful mouth
sitting atop its head. Its three long arms are each tipped
with sharp talons, and its three large, stone-lidded eyes
see in all directions.
Elemental Travelers. Possessed of the power of
elemental earth, a xorn glides through stone and dirt as
easily as a fish swims through water. It doesn't displace
earth or stone when it moves, but merges with and flows
through it, leaving no tunnel, hole, or hint of its passage.
Xorn prefer not to leave their home plane, where they
easily eat their fill of gemstones and precious metals.
When a xorn winds up on the Material Plane, whether
by accident or from curiosity, it seeks sustenance
and a way home.
Beggars and Thieves. Xorn scour the depths of the
earth for precious metal and stones. Because they
are unable to consume organic material, they ignore
most other creatures. However, a xorn's ability to sniff
out metals and stones often draws its attention to
adventurers carrying coins and gems. Because a xorn
isn't evil, it pleads or bargains in the hope of convincing
owners to give up their treasure, offering up information
it has learned from its travels in exchange. A xorn
whose requests are ignored might resort to threats and
bullying. If starving or angered, it resorts to force.
^rr
. w- a Ji«bH^j«afajf»jaa»ai
Xorn
Medium elemental, neutral
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 73 (7d8 + 42)
Speed 20 ft., burrow 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      10 (+0)     22 (+6)      11 (+0)     10 (+0)     11 (+0)
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +3
Damage Resistances piercing and slashing from nonmagical
weapons that aren't adamantine
Senses darkvision 60 ft, tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 16
Languages Terran
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Earth Glide. The xorn can burrow through nonmagical,
unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the xorn doesn't
disturb the material it moves through.
Stone Camouflage. The xorn has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.

1 Treasure Sense. The xorn can pinpoint, by scent, the location of I
I precious metals and stones, such as coins and gems, within 60
J feet of it.
Actions___________________________I
Multiattack. The xorn makes three claw attacks and one
I bite attack.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
J Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) piercing damage.
304
XORN
-rp~frw7u^. n >^r   ^r~~
Yeti
Large monstrosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 51 (6dl0+18)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      13 (+1)      16 (+3)       8 (-1)       12 (+1)       7 (-2)
i ——™"———-------------------------■---------------
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities cold
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
, Languages Yeti
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Fear of Fire. If the yeti takes fire damage, it has disadvantage
I on attack rolls and ability checks until the end of its next turn.
1 Keen Smell. The yeti has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
\ checks that rely on smell.
Snow Camouflage. The yeti has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in snpwy terrain.
Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The yeti can use its Chilling Gaze and makes two
claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) slashing damage plus 3 (ld6) cold damage.
Chilling Coze. The yeti targets one creature it can see within 30
feet of it. If the target can see the yeti, the target must succeed
on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw against this magic or
take 10 (3d6) cold damage and then be paralyzed for 1 minute,
unless it is immune to cold damage. The target can repeat the
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect
on itself on a success. If the target's saving throw is successful,
or if the effect ends on it, the target is immune to the Chilling
Gaze of all yetis (but not abominable yetls) for 1 hour.
i>    30?
H
Abominable Yeti
Hwge 'htonsirosity, chaotic evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 137 (lldl2 + 66)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
24 (+7)      10 (+0)     22 (+6)       9 (-1)       13 (+1)       9 (-1)
I Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4
,j Damage Immunities cold
J Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception IS
1 Languages Yeti
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Fear of Fire. If the yeti takes fire damage, it has disadvantage
on attack rolls and ability checks until the end of its next turn.
Keen Smell. The yeti has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Snow Camouflage. The yeti has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in snowy terrain.
Actions
Multiattack. The yeti can use its Chilling Caze and makes two
claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) cold damage.
Chilling Caze. The yeti targets one creature it can see within 30
feet of it. If the target can see the yeti, the target must succeed
on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw against this magic or
take 21 (6d6) cold damage and then be paralyzed for 1 minute,
unless it is immune to cold damage. The target can repeat the
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect
on itself on a success. If the target's saving throw is successful,
or if the effect ends on it, the target is immune to this yeti's
gaze for 1 hour.
Cold Breath (Recharge 6). The yeti exhales a 30-foot cone
of frigid air. Each creature in that area must make a DC 18
Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) cold damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
■ w
Yeti
A yeti's windborne howl sounds out across remote
mountains, striking fear into the hearts of the scattered
miners and herders that dwell there. These hulking
creatures stalk alpine peaks in a ceaseless hunt for
food. Their snow-white fur lets them move like ghosts
against the frozen landscape. A yeti's icy simian eyes
can freeze its prey in place.
Keen Hunters. Folk of the high peaks travel in groups
and go armed, knowing that yetis can smell living
flesh from miles away. When it finds prey, a yeti moves
quickly over ice and stone to claim its meal, howling to
the thrill of the hunt. Even in a blizzard, the scent of its
quarry draws the yeti through the cold and snow.
Yetis hunt in solitude or in small family groups. When
creatures flee from a yeti or engage it in battle, other
yetis might catch the scent of blood and close in. The
territorial yetis fight one another for the spoils of such
battles, and yetis slain in the fight are also eaten, amid
euphoric howls.
Terrifying Howlers. Before an avalanche, a blizzard,
or a deadly frost, the yetis' howls sweep down the
mountain slopes on the icy wind. Some people of the
alpine peaks believe that the voices of loved ones killed
in avalanches and blizzards sound out in the wails of
the yetis, crying warnings of ill omen. More pragmatic
folk attest that the yeti's howl is a reminder that, despite
the great accomplishments of civilization, the civilized
become the hunted in nature's untamed domain.
Brutal Rampagers. When mountain herds are
abundant, yetis stay clear of humanoid realms. Driven
by hunger, they attack humanoid settlements in
waves, breaking down gates and stockade walls that
once might have daunted them, then devouring the
creatures within.
Devious mountain folk sometimes use the yetis
as unwitting weapons. A warlord might lay down
slaughtered sheep or goats to draw yetis into an enemy's
camp, sowing chaos and thinning the ranks before
battle. Mountain clan chiefs, wanting to expand their
territory, overhunt local game to diminish the yetis' food
supplies, inspiring attacks on humanoid settlements
that are swiftly annexed in the aftermath.
Abominable Yetis. An abominable yeti is larger
than a normal yeti, standing three times as tall as a
human. It typically lives and hunts alone, though a pair
of abominable yetis might live together long enough to
raise young. These towering yetis are highly territorial
and savage, attacking and devouring any warm-blooded
creatures they encounter, then scattering the bones
across the ice and snow.
306
D ViBTI1;
Yuan-ti
Yuan-ti are devious serpent folk devoid of compassion,
From remote temples in jungles, swamps, and deserts,
the yuan-ti plot to supplant and dominate all other races
and to make themselves gods.
Forsaken Humanity. The yuan-ti were once humans
who thrived in the earliest days of civilization and
worshiped serpents as totem animals. They lauded the
serpent's sinuous flexibility, its calculated poise, and
its deadly strike. Their advanced philosophy taught
the virtue of detachment from emotion and of clear,
focused thought.
Yuan-ti culture was among the richest in the mortal
world. Their warriors were legendary, their empires
always expanding. Yuan-ti temples stood at the
centers of ancient metropolises, reaching ever higher
in prayer to the gods they longed to emulate. In time,
the serpent gods heard those prayers, their sibilant
voices responding from the darkness as they told the
yuan-ti what they must do. The yuan-ti religion grew
more fanatical in its devotion. Cults bound themselves
to the worship of the serpent gods and imitated their
ways, indulging in cannibalism and humanoid sacrifice.
Through foul sorcery, the yuan-ti bred with snakes,
utterly sacrificing their humanity to become like the
serpent gods in form, as well as in thought and emotion.
Serpent Kings of Fallen Empires. The yuan-ti view
their physical transformation as a transcendent moment
for their race, allowing them to shed their frail humanity
like dead skin. Those that, did not transform eventually
became slaves or food for the blessed of the serpent
gods. The yuan-ti empires withered or were defeated by
those who fought against their cannibalism and slavery,
and the serpent folk were left in the ruins of their great
capitals, far removed from other races.
Cold of Heart. Humanoid emotions are foreign to
most yuan-ti, which understand sentiment only as an
exploitable weakness. A yuan-ti views the world and
the events of its own life with such extreme pragmatism
that it is nearly impossible to manipulate, influence, or
control by nonmagical means, even as it seeks to control
other creatures through terror, pleasure, and awe.
Yuan-ti know that the world they hope to rule can't be
bound for long by brute force, and that many creatures
will refuse to serve. As a result, yuan-ti first influence
other creatures with the promise of wealth and power.
Time and again, humanoid cultures make the fatal
mistake of trusting the yuan-ti. They forget that a yuan-ti
that acts honorably or lends aid in a time of trouble does
so only as part of a grander design.
Yuan-ti leaders are cunning and ruthless tacticians
who readily sacrifice lesser yuan-ti if potential victory
justifies such losses. They have no sense of honorable
combat and strike first in decisive ambush if they can.
False Worship. Yuan-ti life revolves around their
temples, yet yuan-ti don't love the gods they worship.
Instead, they see worship as a means to attain power. A
yuan-ti believes an individual who attains enough power
can devour and replace one of the yuan-ti gods. The
yiian~ti strive for ascension and are willing to commit
the darkest atrocities to achieve it.
I

rAST OFF THEIR
HUMANITV LONG A
tHE1R5^.tv,           A5TERSorTHe
, riTV BV CoOO VlOM<
Yuan-ti Abomination
•>
Monstrous serpents with burly humanoid torsos and
arms, abominations form the highest caste of yuan-ti
society, and they most closely resemble the race as the
serpent, gods intended it. They mastermind elaborate
schemes and perform dark rites in the hope of one day
ruling the world.
Yuan-ti Abomination
Large monstrosity (shapechanger, yuan-ti), neutral evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (15dl0 +45)
Speed 40 ft.
'>■—^—.—
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      16 (+3)      17 (+3)      17 (+3)     15 (+2)      18 (+4)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +6
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Shapechanger. The yuan-ti can use its action to polymorph
into a Large snake, or back into its true form. Its statistics are
the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying
isn't transformed. It doesn't change form if it dies.
Innate Spellcasting (Abomination Form Only). The yuan-ti's
innate spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 15). The
yuan-ti can innately cast the following spells, requiring no
material components:
At will: animal friendship (snakes only)
3/day: suggestion
l/day:/eor
Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws
against.spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack (Abomination Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two
ranged attacks or three melee attacks, but can use its bite and
constrict attacks only once each.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple ends, the target is
restrained, and the yuan-ti can't constrict another target.
Scimitar (Abomination Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Longbow (Abomination Form Only). Ranged Weapon Attack: +6
. to hit, range 150/600 ft,, one target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing
damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage.

-

308
■Ti

Yuan-ti Malison
A malison is a hideous blend of human and serpentine
features. Three different types of malisons are known
to exist, and other types are possible. Malisons form
the middle caste of yuan-ti society and hunt'with arrows
tipped with their own venom. They use their magical
powers of suggestion to force their enemies' surrender.
Yuan-ti Malison
Medium monstrosity (shapechangeri yuan-ti), neutral evil
f"1                '     '■'
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 66 (12d8+12)
Speed 30 ft.
V
STR
16 (+3)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
13 (+1)
INT
14 (+2)
WIS
12 (+1)
CHA
16 (+3)
Skills Deception +5, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities poison
i Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Shapechanger. The yuan-ti can use its action to polymorph into
a Medium snake, or back into its true form. Its statistics are
the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying
isn't transformed. It doesn't change form if it dies.
Innate Spellcasting (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti's innate
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 13). The yuan-ti
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material
components:
, At will: animal friendship (snakes only)
3/day: suggestion
Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Malison Type. The yuan-ti has one of the following types:
Type 1: Human body with snake head
Type 2: Human head and body with snakes for arms
Type 3: Human head and upper body with a serpentine lower
body instead of legs
Actions for Type i
Multiattack (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two
ranged attacks or two melee attacks, but can use its bite
only once.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage.
Scimitar (Yuan-ti Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Longbow (Yuan-ti Form Only). Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to
hit, range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing
damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage.
Actions for Type 2____________________
Multiattack (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two bite
attacks using its snake arms.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
: Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage.
Actions for Type 3_____________________
Multiattack (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two
ranged attacks or two melee attacks, but can constrict
only once.
Bite (Snake Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach
5 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7
(2d6) poison damage.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the target is
restrained, and the yuan-ti can't constrict another target.
Scimitar (Yuan-ti Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Longbow (Yuan-ti Form Only). Ranged Weapon Attack:
+4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2)
piercing damage.

309
YUAN-TI PUREBLOOD
Purebloods form the lowest caste of yuan-ti society.
They closely resemble humans, yet a pureblood
can't pass for human under close scrutiny because
there's always some hint of its true nature, such as
scaly patches of skin, serpentine eyes, pointed teeth,
or a forked tongue. Wearing cloaks and cowls, they
masquerade as humans and infiltrate civilized lands to
gather information, kidnap prisoners for interrogation
and sacrifice, and trade with anyone who has something
that can further their myriad plots.
310      S^
YJJAJg-Tl
Serpent Cods
The yuan-ti revere a number of powerful entities as gods,
including the following.
Dendar, the Night Serpent. Dendar's followers say that
one day she will grow so large from feasting on the fears and
nightmares of the world that she will devour it whole. Yuan-ti
that serve Dendar terrorize other creatures in any way they
can, growing and nurturing the fears of humanoids to feed
the Night Serpent.
Merrshaulk, Master of the Pit. Merrshaulk is the long-
slumbering chief deity of the yuan-ti. As worship of
Merrshaulk waned, he went into slumber. Merrshaulk's
priests are yuan-ti abominations that maintain traditions of
living sacrifice and cause suffering in the god's name. With
enough vile acts, the abominations believe that Merrshaulk
will reawaken and restore the yuan-ti to their rightful place.
Sseth, the Sibilant Death. Sseth appeared to the yuan-ti
of antiquity in the form of a winged yuan-ti claiming to be
an avatar of Merrshaulk. Speaking with Merrshaulk's voice,
Sseth vowed to pull the yuan-ti out of decline and build a
new empire. Many of Merrshaulk's devout turned to the
worship of Sseth. Some yuan-ti have long suspected Sseth
as an usurper taking advantage of Merrshaulk's slumber
to make himself a god. They believe that Sseth might even
have devoured Merrshaulk, and now answers the prayers of
Merrshaulk's followers, as his priests convert or consume
Merrshaulk's more stubborn adherents.
'
mmmmm***m
Yuan-ti Pureblood
Medium humanoid (yuan-ti), neutral evil
, Armor Class 11
t Hit Points 40 (9dg)
te^mmemm
Speed 30 ft.

STR
11 (+0)
DEX
12 (+1)
CON
11 (+0)
INT
13 (+1)
WIS
12 (+1)
CHA
14 (+2)
Skills Deception +6, Perception +3, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The yuan-ti's spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 12). The yuan-ti can innately cast the
following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: animal friendship (snakes only)
3/day each: poison spray, suggestion
Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The yuan-ti makes two melee attacks.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 80/320
ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6)
poison damage.

\
J
YUGOLOTHS
Yugoloths are fickle fiends that inhabit the planes
of Acheron, Gehenna, Hades, and Carceri. They act
as mercenaries and are notorious for their shifting
loyalties. They are the embodiments of avarite. Before
serving under anyone's banner, a yugoloth asks the only
question on its mind: What's in it forme?
Spawn of Gehenna. The first yugoloths were
created by a sisterhood of night hags on Gehenna. It
is widely believed that Asmodeus, Lord of the Nine
Hells, commissioned the work, in the hope of creating
an army of fiends that were not bound to the Nine
Hells. In the course of making this new army, the hags
crafted four magic tomes and recorded the true names
of every yugoloth they created, save one, the General
of Gehenna. These tomes were called the Books of
Keeping. Since knowing a fiend's true name grants
power over it, the hags used the books to ensure the
yugoloths' loyalty. They also used the books to capture
the true names of other fiends that crossed them. It is
rumored that the Books of Keeping contain the true
names of a few demon lords and archdevils as well.
Petty jealousies and endless bickering caused
the sisterhood to dissolve, and in the ensuing power
grab, the Books of Keeping were lost or stolen. No
longer indentured to anyone, the yugoloths gained
independence, and they now offer their services to the
highest bidder.
Fiendish Mercenaries. Summoned yugoloths
demand much for their time and loyalty. Whatever
promises a yugoloth makes are quickly broken when
a better opportunity presents itself. Unlike demons,
yugoloths can be reasoned with, but unlike devils, they
are rarely true to their word.
Yugoloths can be found anywhere, but the high cost of
maintaining a yugoloth army's loyalty typically exceeds
what any warlord on the Material Plane can pay.
Being self-serving creatures, yugoloths quarrel
among themselves constantly. A yugoloth army is more
organized than a ravening horde of demons, but far less
orderly and regimented than a legion of devils. Without
a powerful leader to keep them in line, yugoloths fight
simply to indulge their violent predilections, and only as
long as it benefits them to do so.
Back to Gehenna. When a yugoloth dies, it dissolves
into a pool of ichor and reforms at full strength on the
Bleak Eternity of Gehenna. Only on its native plane
can a yugoloth be destroyed permanently. A yugoloth
knows this and acts accordingly. When summoned to
other planes, a yugoloth fights without concern for its
own well-being. On Gehenna, it is more apt to retreat or
plead for mercy if its demise seems imminent.
When a yugoloth is permanently destroyed, its name
vanishes from every Book of Keeping. If a yugoloth
is re-created by way of an unholy ritual requiring the
expenditure of souls, its name reappears in the books.
The Books of Keeping. When all four copies of the
Books of Keeping disappeared, Asmodeus and the night
hags lost control of their yugoloth creations. Each Book
of Keeping still exists, drifting from plane to plane,
where the brave and the foolish occasionally stumble
upon them. A yugoloth summoned using its true iifffif,
as inscribed in the Books of Keeping, is forced to serve
its summoner obediently. The yugoloth hates being
controlled in this manner and isn't shy about making
its displeasure known. Like a petulant child, it will
follow its instructions to the letter while looking for
opportunities to misinterpret them.
The General of Gehenna. Somewhere in the
brimstone wastes of Gehenna, there roarns an ulfrjtfqtlv
so strong that none contests his power: the General of
Gehenna. Many yugoloths search for this great general:
in the hope of serving with him. They believe thafc
service with the General of Gehenna grants poWenknd
prestige among lower planar entities.
Whatever the case, no fiend finds the General/ffiless '$
the General desires it. His personal name is unktjq%n,
and even the Books of Keeping contain no mention of
this powerful, thoroughly evil entity.
Arcanaloth______________________
Arcanaloths are sly, jackal-headed beings with
humanoid bodies, but they can employ magic to take any
humanoid form. They do so to gain the trust of creatures
with whom they negotiate, replacing jackal snarls with
winsome smiles.
Regardless of its chosen form, an arcanaloth appears
well groomed, clothing itself in fine robes. Highly
intelligent spellcasters who hunger for knowledge and
power, arcanaloths command units of lesser yugoloths
and maintain the contracts, records, and accounts
of their kind.
Arcanaloths speak and write all languages, making
them cunning diplomats and negotiators. An arcanaloth
properly paid can broker treaties or alliances with
subtlety and finesse, just as an arcanaloth who changes
sides can easily turn the best-laid peace talks into all-out
war. What the fiend demands in exchange for its time
and talent is information, as well as powerful magic
items that it can trade for even more information.
-f__________________________________________fc.
Variant: Yugoloth Summoning
Some yugoloths have an action option that allows them to
summon other yugoloths.
Summon Yugoloth (1/Day). The yugoloth chooses what to
summon and attempts a magical summoning.
•  An arcanaloth has a 40 percent chance of summoning
one arcanaloth.
•  A mezzoloth has a 30 percent chance of summoning
one mezzoloth.
•  A nycaloth has a 50 percent chance of summoning ld4
mezzoloths or one nycaloth.
•  An ultroloth has a 50 percent chance of summoning 1d6
mezzoloths, ld4 nycaloths, or one ultroloth.
A summoned yugoloth appears in an unoccupied space
within 60 feet of its summoner, does as it pleases (unless
its summoner is an ultroloth, in which case it acts as an ally
of its summoner), and can't summon other yugoloths. The
summoned yugoloth remains for 1 minute, until it or its
summoner dies, or until its summoner takes a bonus action
to dismiss it.
3tr
Mezzoloth
The bulk of the yugoloth population is made up of
mezzoloths, which are human-sized insect creatures
covered in dense chitinous plates. Mezzoloths serve
as foot soldiers in yugoloth armies, their wide-set eyes
glowing red as the mezzoloths bear down on their foes.
Violence and reward are the fundamental drives of
a mezzoloth, and powerful beings that promise one or
the other can easily attract them into service. Although
"it has lethal claws on its four arms, a mezzoloth
typically wields a trident in two of them. If surrounded
by enemies, a mezzoloth exhales toxic fumes that can
choke and kill whole groups of creatures.
Nycaloth
The elite airborne shock troops of the yugoloths,
nycaloths look like muscular gargoyles. Powerful bat
wings bear them swiftly aloft in battle, and the razor-
sharp claws of their hands and feet cut through flesh
and bone with ease. A nightmarish foe, a nycaloth
strikes hard and fast without warning, then teleports
away. It uses its innate magic to turn invisible or
create illusory doubles of itself, further confounding
its enemies.
Nycaloths are the most loyal of the yugoloths. When
they find an evil master that treats them well, they are
unlikely to break their agreement unless the reward for
doing so is extreme.  ■
Ultroloth
Ultroloths command the yugoloth armies of the Blood
War. An ultroloth looks like a slender gray-skinned
humanoid with an elongated head. Its face bears no
features except for two ovoid eyes. These eyes can
. .become sparkling pools of light that can transfix other
creatures and leave them reeling and helpless.
Frequently at one another's throats, ultroloths
continually scheme to enhance their own
power. When not employed to fight in the
Blood War, ultroloths lead yugoloth
forces throughout the planes, acting
as crime bosses or commanders of
evil mercenary companies.
With a reputation for cruelty,
ultroloths command their
minions to fight while the
ultroloths stay removed
from combat themselves.
Lesser yugoloths know
their place when facing an
ultroloth and respond to its                                        ^
summons without demand
for payment.
Arcanaloth
UltrSloth

\
\
•V
Nycaloth
;wwEALLCRAvE,T,BUT0NLyA
^LECT FEWOFUSDEse?v6it„0^ A
-She£6s„;;a the Marauder
aRcWaToth in s.gil'
31«
VSttGQj.OTHS

ArcaKaxoth
"Medium fiend (yugoloth), neutral evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
17 (+3)
DEX
12 (+1)
CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      20 (+5)     16 (+3)      17 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Int +9, Wis +7, Cha +7
Skills Arcana +13, Deception +9, Insight+9, Perception +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The arcanaloth's innate spellcasting ability
, is Charisma (spell save DC 15). The arcanaloth can innately
cast the following spells, requiring no material components:
At will: alter self, darkness, heat metal, invisibility (self only),
magic missile
Magic Resistance. The arcanaloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The arcanaloth's weapon attacks are magical.
Spellcasting. The arcanaloth is a 16th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit
with spell attacks). The arcanaloth has the following wizard
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, mage hand, minor illusion,
prestidigitation
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, identify, shield, Tenser's
floating disk
2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, mirror image, phantasmal
force, suggestion
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fear, fireball
4th level (3 slots): banishment, dimension door
5th level (2 slots): contact other plane, hold monster
6th level (1 slot): chain lightning
7th level (1 s\ot):finger of death
8th level (1 slot): mind blank
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) slashing damage. The target must make a DC
14 Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
•Teleport. The arcanaloth magically teleports, along with
any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 75 (10d8 +30)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      11 (+0)      16 (+3)       7 (-2)      10 (+0)      11 (+0)
Skills Perception +3
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft.,
passive Perception 13
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The mezzoloth's innate spellcasting ability
is Charisma (spell save DC 11). The mezzoloth can innately
cast the following spells, requiring no material components:
2/day each: darkness, dispel magic
1/day: cloudkill
Magic Resistance. The mezzoloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The mezzoloth's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The mezzoloth makes two attacks: one with its
claws and one with its trident.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) slashing damage.
Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage,
or 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage when held with two claws and
used to make a melee attack.
Teleport. The mezzoloth magically teleports, along with
any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.

313
Nygaloth
Large fiend (yugoloth), neutral evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 123 (13dl0 + 52)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
20 (+5)      11 (+0)      19 (+4)
INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)     10 (+0)      15 (+2)
Skills Intimidation +6, Perception +4, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft.,
passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The nycaloth's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma. The nycaloth can innately cast the following spells,
requiring no material components:
At will: darkness, detect magic, dispel magic, invisibility (self
only), mirror image
Magic Resistance. The nycaloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Magic Weapons. The nycaloth's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The nycaloth makes two melee attacks, or
it makes one melee attack and teleports before or after
the attack.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or take
5 (2d4) slashing damage at the start of each of its turns due
to a fiendish wound. Each time the nycaloth hits the wounded
target with this attack, the damage dealt by the wound
increases by 5 (2d4). Any creature can take an action to stanch
the wound with a successful DC 13 Wisdom (Medicine) check.
The wound also closes if the target receives magical healing.
Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 18 (2dl2+ 5) slashing damage.
Teleport. The nycaloth magically teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an
unoccupied space it can see.
' -   ,    '   ~
Ultroloth
Medium fiend (yugoloth), neutral evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 153 (18d8 +72)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR
16 (+3)
DEX         CON
16 (+3)      18 (+4)
INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)     15 (+2)      19 (+4)
Skills Intimidation +9, Perception +7, Stealth +8
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP)
Innate Spellcasting. The ultroloth's innate spellcasting ability is
Charisma (spell save DC 17). The ultroloth can innately cast the
j following spells, requiring no material components:
I At will: alter self, clairvoyance, darkness, detect magic, detect
thoughts, dispel magic, invisibility (self only), suggestion
J 3/day each: dimension door, fear, wall of fire
I 1/day each: fire storm, mass suggestion
", Magic Resistance. The ultroloth has advantage on saving
f throws against spells and other magical effects.
■ Magic Weapons. The ultroloth's weapon attacks are magical.
Actions
Multiattack. The ultroloth can use its Hypnotic Gaze and
makes three melee attacks.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (ldlO + 3)
slashing damage if used with two hands.
Hypnotic Caze. The ultroloth's eyes sparkle with opalescent
light as it targets one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. If
the target can see the ultroloth, the target must succeed on a
I DC 17 Wisdom saving throw against this magic or be charmed
until the end of the ultroloth's next turn. The charmed target is
stunned. If the target's saving throw is successful, the target is
I immune to the ultroloth's gaze for the next 24 hours.
I Teleport. The ultroloth magically teleports, along with any
| equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an
j unoccupied space it can see.


314
Zombies
From somewhere in the darkness, a gurgling moan
is heard. A form lurches into view, dragging one foot
as it raises bloated arms and broken hands. The
zombie advances, driven to kill anyone too slow to
escape its grasp.
Dark Servants. Sinister necromantic magic infuses
the remains of the dead, causing them to rise as
zombies that do their creator's bidding without fear or
hesitation. They move with a jerky, uneven gait, clad
in the moldering apparel they wore when put to
rest, and carrying the stench of decay.
Most zombies are made from humanoid
remains, though the flesh and bones of any
formerly living creature can be imbued with
a semblance of life. Necromantic magic,
usually from spells, animates a zombie. Some
zombies rise spontaneously when dark magic
saturates an area. Once turned into a zombie,
a creature can't be restored to life except by
powerful magic, such as a resurrection spell.
A zombie retains no vestiges of its former self,
its mind devoid of thought and imagination. A
zombie left without orders simply stands in place
and rots unless something comes along that it
can kill. The magic animating a zombie imbues
it with evil, so left without purpose, it attacks any living
creature it encounters.
Hideous Forms. Zombies appear as they did in life,
showing the wounds that killed them. However, the
magic that creates these vile creatures often takes
time to run its course. Dead warriors might rise from a
battlefield, eviscerated and bloated after days in the sun.
The muddy cadaver of a peasant could claw its way from
the ground, riddled with maggots and worms. A zombie
might wash ashore or rise from a marsh, swollen and
reeking after weeks in the water.
Mindless Soldiers. Zombies take the most direct
route to any foe, unable to comprehend obstacles,
tactics, or dangerous terrain. A zombie might stumble
into a fast-flowing river to reach foes on a far shore,
clawing at the surface as it is battered against rocks
and destroyed. To reach a foe below it, a zombie might
step out of an open window. Zombies stumble through
roaring infernos, into pools of acid, and across fields
littered with caltrops without hesitation.
A zombie can follow simple orders and distinguish
friends from foes, but its ability to reason is limited
to shambling in whatever direction it is pointed,
pummeling any enemy in its path. A zombie armed
with a weapon uses it, but the zombie won't retrieve a
dropped weapon or other tool until told to do so.
Undead Nature. A zombie doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Beholder
Zombie
'AFTER Be.k o,«. we CAST AN ANNATE D«0 SP^Ut
„M HIS corpse. It was fun for a while, but the
"CM     E STARTS TO SMELL REAU BAP, SO We POUSEP
;;rN0,:ANOSETlTONF,R,lBEE,,VOULP'vEFOUNP
™AT H,LAR'OUSiFONK,N HOPO^EAK. ON FR,ENPSH,P
»   ■
Zombie
Medium undead, neutral evil
Armor Class 8
Hit Points 22 (3d8 + 9)
Speed 20 ft.
STR
13 (+1)
DEX         CON
6 (-2)      16 (+3)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
6 (-2)
CHA
5 (-3)
Beholder Zombie
Large undead, neutral evil
Saving Throws Wis +0
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages understands the languages it knew in life but
can't speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or
from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit
point instead.
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 93 (lldl0+ 33)
r Speed Oft., fly 20 ft. (hover)
'   ■......
10 (+0)
DEX
8(-l)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
8(-l)
CHA
5 (-3)
Actions
J Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
■ ia. ■-a'da-tt.--------------------------- ... _-, .   -jm

j Ogre Zombie
1 Large undead, neutral evil
J ia——>——^—
1 Armor Class 8
■i Hit Points 85 (9dl0 +36)
Speed 30 ft.
Saving Throws Wis +2
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands Deep Speech and Undercommon but
can't speak
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or
from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit
point instead.
] Actions
str
19 (+4)
DEX
6 (-2)
CON
18 (+4)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
6 (-2)
CHA
5 (-3)
Saving Throws Wis +0
*> Damage Immunities poison
I Condition Immunities poisoned
I Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
,'j Languages understands Common and Giant but can't speak
; Challenge 2 (450 XP)
I Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC
| of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or
from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit
point instead.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
I Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage.

Actions
Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
i ; target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Eye Ray. The zombie uses a random magical eye ray, choosing
a target that it can see within 60 feet of it.
J. Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a
DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute.
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
2.  Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 14
Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
3.  Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 14
Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
4.  Disintegration Ray. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8)
J  force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit
I  points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust.
If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or
I  creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving
I  throw. If the target is a Huge or larger nonmagical object
\  or creation of magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot
I  cube of it.
H
Appendix A: Miscellaneous Creatures
This appendix contains statistics for various animals,
vermin, and other critters. The stat blocks are organized
alphabetically by creature name.
Ape
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)       6 (-2)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The ape makes two fist attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
6 (ld6,+'3) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 25/50 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Awakened Shrub
Small plant; unaligned
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 10 (3d6)
Speed 20 ft.
STR          DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)        8(-l)      11 (+0)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      6 (-2)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances piercing
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages one language known by its creator
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
False Appearance. While the shrub remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a normal shrub.
Actions
Rake. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 (ld4 - 1) slashing damage.
An awakened shrub is an ordinary shrub given
sentience and mobility by the awaken spell or
similar magic.
Awakened Tree
Huge plant, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 59 (7dl2 + 14)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)       6 (-2)      15 (+2)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      7 (-2)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages one language known by its creator
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
False Appearance. While the tree remains motionless, it is
indistinguishable from a normal tree.
Actions_____________________________
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
An awakened tree is an ordinary tree given sentience
and mobility by the awaken spell or similar magic.
Axe Beak
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
HitPointsl9(3dlO+3)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)       12 (+1)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)       5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) slashing damage.
An axe beak is a tall flightless bird with strong legs and
a heavy, wedge-shaped beak. It has a nasty disposition
and tends to attack any unfamiliar creature that
wanders too close.
"                                                                         >
Other Animals
A book of this size can't contain statistics for every animal
inhabiting your D&.D campaign world. However, you can
use the stat block of one animal to represent another easily
enough. For example, you can use the panther statistics to
represent a jaguar, the giant goat statistics to represent a
buffalo, and the hawk statistics to represent a falcon.
J
APPENDIX A: MISC:
W


Baboon
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 3 (ld6)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
8 (-1)       14 (+2)      11 (+0)       4 (-3)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Pack Tactics. The baboon has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the baboon's allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 (ld4 - 1) piercing damage.
Badger
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 3 (ld4 + 1)
Speed 20 ft., burrow 5 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
4 (-3)       11 (+0)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The badger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Bat
'Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       15 (+2)       8(-l)        2 (-4)      12 (+1)       4 (-3)
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Echolocation. The bat can't use its blindsight while deafened.
Keen Hearing. The bat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checksthatrelyon hearing.
ActKon^'

Bite, Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft.,' one creature.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Black Bear
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d8 +6)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      10 (+0)      14 (+2)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its bite and
one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Blink Dog
Medium fey, lawful good
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       17 (+3)      12 (+1)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)      11 (+0)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Blink Dog, understands Sylvan but can't speak it
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The dog has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage.
Teleport (Recharge 4-6). The dog magically teleports, along
with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 40 feet to
an unoccupied space it can see. Before or after teleporting, the
dog can make one bite attack.
A blink dog takes its name from its ability to blink in
and out of existence, a talent it uses to aid its attacks
and to avoid harm. Blink dogs harbor a long-standing
hatred for displacer beasts and attack them on sight.

3*8


iNEOUS CREATURES
BLtboi) Hawk
Small beast, unaligned
irroor Class 12
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
6 (-2)       14 (+2)      10 (+0)       3 (-4)      14 (+2)       5 (-3)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Keen Sight. The hawk has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Pack Tactics. The hawk has advantage on an attack roll against
a creature if at least one of the hawk's allies is within 5 feet of
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Taking its name from its crimson feathers and
aggressive nature, the blood hawk fearlessly attacks
almost any animal, stabbing it with its daggerlike beak.
Blood hawks flock together in large numbers, attacking
as a pack to take down prey.
Boar
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON 13 (+1)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)	INT 2 (-4)	WIS          CHA 9H)        5,jtr3)
Senses passive Perception 9 Languages — Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)		^.*mm
		•■ "Vi ^Mt^c
Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight tov/atp%"-.
target and then hits it with a tusk attack on the same tu'r'nf the
target takes an extra 3 (ld6) slashing damage. If the target is a";
creature, it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the boar
takes 7 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it is
reduced to 1 hit point instead.
Actions
TusJIr. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.
Brown Bear
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 34 (4d10+12)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      10 (+0)      16 (+3)       2 (-4)      13 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its bite and
one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
APPENDIX A:   Mi.'   I  i I
y
319
I '-...
Camel Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 9 HitPointsl5(2dlO + 4) Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON 16 (+3)       8 (-1)       14 (+2)	INT 2 (-4)	WIS 8(-l)	CHA 5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 9 Languages — Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage.
Gat
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)       15 (+2)      10 (+0)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The cat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions_____________________________
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 slashing damage.
Constrictor Snake
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (2dl0 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Constrict.'IWelee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5* ft., one
creature. Hit: 6 Qd8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the
target is grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple ends,
the creature is restrained, and the snake can't constrict
another target.
Grab
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       11 (+0)      10 (+0)       1 (-5)       8 (-1)       2 (-4)
Skills Stealth +2
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water.
Actions____________________________
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 bludgeoning damage.
Crocodile
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
HitPointsl9(3dl0 + 3)
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Skills Stealth +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple ends, the target is
restrained, and the crocodile can't bite another target.
3&0
MJS< £l.LANEO.OE CREATURES
Death Dog
Medium monstrosity, neutral evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 39 (6d8+12)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)       3 (-4)      13 (+1)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Two-Headed. The dog has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks and on saving throws against being blinded, charmed,
deafened, frightened, stunned, or knocked unconscious.
Actions
Multiattack. The dog makes two bite attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it
must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw against
disease or become poisoned until the disease is cured. Every 24
hours that elapse, the creature must repeat the saving throw,
reducing its hit point maximum by 5 (ldlO) on a failure. This
reduction lasts until the disease is cured. The creature dies if
the disease reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
A death dog is an ugly two-headed hound that roams
plains, deserts, and the Underdark. Hate burns in a
death dog's heart, and a taste for humanoid flesh drives
it to attack travelers and explorers. Death dog saliva
carries a foul disease that causes a victim's flesh to
slowly rot off the bone.
Deer
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 4 (ld8)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      16 (+3)     11 (+0)      2 (-4)      14 (+2)      5JJ-3)
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 fi, oh&staf^t'Aji
Hit: 2 (ld4) piercing damage.
Dire Wolf
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 37 (5dl0 + 10)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      15 (+2)      15 (+2)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on an attack roll against a
creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Draft Horse
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
HitPointsl9(3dlO + 3)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      10 (+0)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      11 (+0)       7 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft,, one target^
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
APPENDIX A: MlSCF.i.LANEO
331

323
Eagle
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 3 (ld6)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
6 (-2)       15 (+2)      10 (+0)       2 (-4)      14 (+2)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Sight. The eagle has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
Elephant
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 76 (8dl2 + 24)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
22 (+6)       9 (-1)       17 (+3)       3 (-4)      11 (+0)      6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
Trampling Charge. If the elephant moves at least 20 feet
Straight toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack
on the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 12
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is
prone, the elephant can make one stomp attack against it as a
bonus action.
Actions
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) piercing damage.
Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone
creature. Hit: 21 (3dl0 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
Elk
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
HitPointsl3(2dlO + 2)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      10 (+0)     12 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
AVPBN'WX As MISC
,| WKOUS CREATURES
\
Chargp. |f the elk moves at least 20 feeVstr'aight toward a'
target and then t|its it with a ram attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone
creature. Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Flying Snake
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 5 (2d4)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
4 (-3)       18 (+4)      11 (+0)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Flyby. The snake doesn't provoke opportunity attacks when it
flies out of an enemy's reach.
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage plus 7 (3d4) poison damage.
A flying snake is a brightly colored, winged serpent
found in remote jungles. Tribespeople and cultists
sometimes domesticate flying snakes to serve as
messengers that deliver scrolls wrapped in their coils.
Frog
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points! (Id4-1)
Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
1 (-5)       13 (+1)      8 (-1)
INT          WIS
1 (-5)       8 (-1)
CHA
3 (-4)
Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 0 (0 XP)
Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water.
Standing Leap. The frog's long jump is up to 10 feet and its
high jump is up to 5 feet, with or without a running start.
A frog has no effective attacks. It feeds on small
insects and typically dwells near water, in trees, or
underground. The frog's statistics can also be used to
represent a toad.
Giant Ape
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 157 (15dl2 + 60)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      14 (+2)      18 (+4)       7 (-2)       12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Athletics +9, Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The ape makes two fist attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3dl0 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 50/100 ft., one
target. Hit: 30 (7d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Giant Badger
Medium beast, unaligned
1    it
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 13 (2d8 +4)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      10 (+0)      15 (+2)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Smell. The badger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The badger makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage.
Giant Bat
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 22 (4dl0)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      16 (+3)      11 (+0)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Echolocation. The bat can't use its blindsight while deafened.
Keen Hearing. The bat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on hearing.
Actions
------------------------------------------„f.t, ^r,.„
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., pne creature.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Giant Boar
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
HitPoints42(5dl0+15)
Speed 40 ft.

Ur
-Ase
-"**:
® If
STR          DEX        CON          INT-     . Vi'lS
17 (+3)      10 (+0)      16 (+3)       2 (-4)       7 (-2)        5 (-3)' *
Senses passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a tusk attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) slashing damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the boar
takes 10 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it
is reduced to 1 hit point instead.
Actions
Tusk. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Giant Centipede
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 4 (ld6+l)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
5 (-3)       14 (+2)      12 (+1)       l(-5)       7 (-2)       3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions_____________________________._
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or take 10 (3d6) poison
damage. If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit
points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even
after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned
in this way.
APPENDIX A, MisctL:
3?3
1 "ff ■
Giant Constrictor Snake
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
HitPoints60(8dl2 + 8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Skills Perception +2
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage, and the
target is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends,
the creature is restrained, and the snake can't constrict
another target.
Giant Grab
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)       15 (+2)      11 (+0)       1 (-5)       9(-l)       3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +4
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water.
DONS
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 11). The crab has two claws, each of
which can grapple only one target.
Giant Eagle
Giant Crocodile
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (9dl2 + 27)
Speed 30 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR
21 (+5)
DEX
9(-l)
CON
17 (+3)
INT
2 (-4)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
7 (-2)
Skills Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 30 minutes.
Actions
Multiattack. The crocodile makes two attacks: one with its bite
and one with its tail.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 21 (3dl0 + 5) piercing damage, and the target is grappled
(escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends, the target is
restrained, and the crocodile can't bite another target.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target
not grappled by the crocodile. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 16
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Giant Eagle
Large beast, neutral good
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 10 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      17 (+3)      13 (+1)       8(-l)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Giant Eagle, understands Common and Auran but
can't speak them
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Sight. The eagle has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The eagle makes two attacks: one with its beak
and one with its talons.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
A giant eagle is a noble creature that speaks its own
language and understands speech in the Common
tongue. A mated pair of giant eagles typically has up
to four eggs or young in their nest (treat the young as
normal eagles).
384-
APPENDIX A: MISeELLANEqjJg, QKEATURES
GianT Elk
Huge beast, unaligned
Giant Frog
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 42 (5dl2+10)
Speed 60 ft.
STR          DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      16 (+3)      14 (+2)       7 (-2)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Giant Elk, understands Common, Elvish, and Sylvan
but can't speak them
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the elk moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone
creature. Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
The majestic giant elk is rare to the point that its
appearance is often taken as a foreshadowing of an
important event, such as the birth of a king. Legends tell
of gods that take the form of giant elk when visiting the
Material Plane. Many cultures therefore believe that to
hunt these creatures is to invite divine wrath.
Giant Fire Beetle
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 4 (ld6 + 1)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
8(-l)       10 (+0)      12 (+1)       l(-5)       7 (-2)        3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Illumination. The beetle sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius
and dim light for an additional 10 feet.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit 2 (ld6 - 1) slashing damage.
A giant fire beetle is a nocturnal creature that takes its
name from a pair of glowing glands that give off light.
Miners and adventurers prize these creatures, for a
giant fire beetle's glands continue to shed light for ld6
days after the beetle dies. Giant fire beetles are most
commonly found underground and in dark forests.
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 18 (4d8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR
12 (+1)
DEX         CON
13 (+1)      11 (+0)
INT
2 (-4)
WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      3 (~4)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water.
Standing Leap. The frog's long jump is up to 20 feet and its
high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6+l) piercing damage, and the target is grappled
(escape DC 11). Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained,
and the frog can't bite another target.
Swallow. The frog makes one bite attack against a Small or
smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target is
swallowed, and the grapple ends. The swallowed target is
blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks and
other effects outside the frog, and it takes 5 (2d4) acid damage
at the start of each of the frog's turns. The frog can have only
one target swallowed at a time.
If the frog dies, a swallowed creature is no longer restrained
by it and can escape from the corpse using 5 feet of movement,
exiting prone.
335:

Giant Goat
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3dl0 + 3)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Charge. If the goat moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage. If the target
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw
or be knocked prone.
Sure-Footed. The goat has advantage on Strength and Dexterity
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Giant Hyena
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 45 (6dl0+12)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      14 (+2)      14 (+2)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Rampage. When the hyena reduces a creature to 0 hit points
with a melee attack on its turn, the hyena can take a bonus
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Giant Lizard
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
HitPointsl9(3dl0+3)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft, one. target."
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
A giant lizard can be ridden or used as a draft animal.
Lizardfolk also keep them as pets, and subterranean
giant lizards are used as mounts and pack animals by
drow, duergar, and other Underdark dwellers.
Variant: Giant Lizard Traits
Some giant lizards have one or both of the following traits.
Hold Breath. The lizard can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
(A lizard that has this trait also has a swimming speed
of 30 feet.)
Spider Climb. The lizard can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make
an ability check.
Giant Octopus
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 52 (8dl0    8)
Speed 10 ft., swim 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      13 (+1)      13 (+1)       4 (-3)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Hold Breath. While out of water, the octopus can hold its
breath for 1 hour.
Underwater Camouflage. The octopus has advantage on
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made while underwater.
Water Breathing. The octopus can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends,
the target is restrained, and the octopus can't use its tentacles
on another target.
Ink Cloud (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). A 20-foot-
radius cloud of ink extends all around the
octopus if it is underwater. The area is
heavily obscured for 1 minute, although a
significant current can disperse the ink.
After releasing the ink, the octopus can
use the Dash action as a bonus action.
Octopus Tentacle

Giant Owl
Large beast, neutral

MOTKE
Armor Class 12
HitPointsl9(3dlO+3)
Speed 5 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)       15 (+2)      12 (+1)       8 (-1)       13 (+1)      10 (+0)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Giant Owl, understands Common, Elvish, and
Sylvan but can't speak them
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Flyby. The owl doesn't provoke opportunity attacks when it
flies out of an enemy's reach.
Keen Hearing and Sight. The owl has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight.
Actions
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d6 + 1) slashing damage.
Giant owls often befriend fey and other sylvan creatures
and are guardians of their woodland realms.
Giant Poisonous Snake
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      18 (+4)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Skills Perception +2
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld4 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must make
a DC 11 Constitution savingthrow, taking 10 (3d6) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
i Variant: Diseased Giant Rats
Some giant rats carry vile diseases that they spread with their
bites. A diseased giant rat has a challenge rating of 1/8 (25
XP) and the following action instead of its normal bite attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or
contract a disease. Until the disease is cured, the target can't
regain hit points except by magical means, and the target's
hit point maximum decreases by 3 (ld6) every 24 hours. If
the target's hit point maximum drops to 0 as a result of this
disease, the target dies.
t,rHTEO THROUGHOUT THE
G1ANT BAT SLAIN W,T                   oEUVEBED TO THE «
CAPTA\N AT THE U
Giant Rat
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
7 (-2)       15 (+2)      11 (+0)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Pack Tactics. The rat has advantage on an attack roll against a
creature if at least one of the rat's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions_____________________________
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Giant Scorpion
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7dl0 +14)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      13 (+1)      15 (+2)       1 (-5)       9 (-1)       3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions___________________________i
Multiattack. The scorpion makes three attacks: two with its
claws and one with its sting.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 12). The scorpion has two claws, each of
which can grapple only one target.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage, and the target must make
a DC 12 Constitution savingthrow, taking 22 (4dl0) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage Qnj
successful one.
APPENDIX A:
3VJ.
338
Giant Sea Horse
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 16 (3dl0)
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)       15 (+2)      11 (+0)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Charge. If the sea horse moves at least 20 feet straight toward
a target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. It the target
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw
or be knocked prone.
Water Breathing. The sea horse can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
H/t.'4 (ld6+ 1) bludgeoning damage.
Like their smaller kin, giant sea horses are shy, colorful
fish with elongated bodies and curled tails. Aquatic elves
train them as mounts.
Giant Shark
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 126 (lldl2 +55)
Speed 0 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
23 (+6)      11 (+0)      21 (+5)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Skills Perception +3
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The shark has advantage on melee attack rolls
against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3dl0 + 6) piercing damage.
A giant shark is 30 feet long and normally found in
deep oceans. Utterly fearless, it preys on anything
that crosses its path, including whales and ships.

%\
w»ft-q^»^_
Giant Spider
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
HitPoints26(4dlO + 4)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      16 (+3)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      11 (+0)      4 (-3)
Skills Stealth +7
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows the
exact location of any other creature in contact with the same web.
Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must make a
DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 9 (2d8) poison damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the
target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way.
Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
range 30/60 ft., one creature. Hit: The target is restrained by
webbing. As an action, the restrained target can make a DC
12 Strength check, bursting the webbing on a success. The
webbing can also be attacked and destroyed (AC 10; hp 5;
vulnerability to fire damage; immunity to bludgeoning, poison,
and psychic damage).
To snare its prey, a giant spider spins elaborate webs
or shoots sticky strands of webbing from its abdomen.
Giant spiders are most commonly found underground,
making their lairs on ceilings or in dark, web-filled
crevices. Such lairs are often festooned with web
cocoons holding past victims.
Giant Spider
Giant Toad
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
HitPoints39(6dlO+6)
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)       13 (+1)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Amphibious. The toad can breathe air and water.
Standing Leap. The toad's long jump is up to 20 feet and its
high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage plus 5 (ldlO) poison
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 13). Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the toad can't bite
another target.
Swallow. The toad makes one bite attack against a Medium
or smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target
is swallowed, and the grapple ends. The swallowed target
is blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks
and other effects outside the toad, and it takes 10 (3d6) acid
damage at the start of each of the toad's turns. The toad can
have only one target swallowed at a time.
If the toad dies, a swallowed creature is no longer restrained
by it and can escape from the corpse using 5 feet of movement,
exiting prone.
Giant Vulture
Large beast, neutral evil
Armor Class 10
HitPoints22(3dlO + 6)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      10 (+0)      15 (+2)       6 (-2)       12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages understands Common but can't speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Sight and Smell. The vulture has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell.
Pack Tactics. The vulture has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the vulture's allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions_____________________________
Multiattack. The vulture makes two attacks: one with its beak
and one with its talons.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
,Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage.
A giant vulture has advanced intelligence and a
malevolent bent. Unlike its smaller kin, it will attack a
wounded creature to hasten its end. Giant vultures have
been known to haunt a thirsty, starving creature for
days to enjoy its suffering.
Giant Wasp
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft.
■' «* &•
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Actions
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must make
a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. If the poison damage reduces the target to 0
hit points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even
after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned
in this way.
Giant Weasel
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 9 (2d8)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      16 (+3)      10 (+0)       4 (-3)      12 (+1)       5 (-3)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The weasel has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Actions'
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage.

APPEKDIX A:  MISt
339
Giant Wolf Spider
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      16 (+3)      13 (+1)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       4 (-3)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +7
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows
the exact location of any other creature in contact with
the same web.
Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld6+ 1) piercing damage, and the target must make a
DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) poison damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the
target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way.
Smaller than a giant spider, a giant wolf spider hunts
prey across open ground or hides in a burrow or crevice,
or in a hidden cavity beneath debris.
Goat
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 4 (ld8)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      10 (+0)      11 (+0)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)      5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Charge. If the goat moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the
target takes an extra 2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage. If the target
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving throw
or be knocked prone.
Sure-Footed. The goat has advantage on Strength and Dexterity
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld4 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
1 APPENDIX A: MISCELLANEOUS. CREATURES
Hawk
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 1 (ld4-l)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
5 (-3)       16 (+3)       8(-l)        2 (-4)      14 (+2)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Sight. The hawk has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 slashing damage.
Hunter Shark
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6dl0+12)
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      13 (+1)      15 (+2)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Skills Perception +2
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The shark has advantage on melee attack rolls
against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Smaller than a giant shark but larger and fiercer than
a reef shark, a hunter shark haunts deep waters. It
usually hunts alone, but multiple hunter sharks might
feed in the same area. A fully grown hunter shark is 15
to 20 feet long.
Hyena
Medium beast, unaligned
.iff i
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 5 (1d8+l)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      13 (+1)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)      5 (-3)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Pack Tactics. The hyena has advantage on an attack roll against
a creature if at least one of the hyena's allies is within 5 feet of
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (ld6) piercing damage.
JACKAL
SrMll beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 3 (ld6)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
8(-l)       IS (+2)      11 (+0)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The jackal has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Pack Tactics. The jackal has advantage on an attack roll against
a creature if at least one of the jackal's allies is within 5 feet of
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 (ld4-l) piercing damage.
Hyena
Killer Whale
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 90 (12dl2 + 12)
Speed 0 ft., swim 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
19 (+4)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)      7vfe2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 13,
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Echolocation. The whale can't use its blindsight
while deafened.
Hold Breath. The whale can hold its breath for 30 minutes.
Keen Hearing. The whale has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 21 (5d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Lion
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      15 (+2)      13 (+1)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)      8 (-1)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Smell. The lion has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Pack Tactics. The lion has advantage on an attack roll against a
creature if at least one of the lion's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Pounce. If the lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn,
that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the lion can make one
bite attack against it as a bonus action.
Running Leap. With a 10-foot running start, the lion can long
jump up to 25 feet.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
APPENDIX A: Ml.HC
33*
Lizard
Tiny beast, unaligned
Mastiff
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 5 (ld8 + 1)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       11 (+0)      10 (+0)       1 (-5)       8 (-1)        3 (-4)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)       14 (+2)      12 (+1)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Keen Hearing and Smell. The mastiff has advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Actions
Mammoth
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 126 (lldl2 +55)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
24 (+7)       9 (-1)       21 (+5)       3 (-4)      11 (+0)       6 (-2)
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Mastiffs are impressive hounds prized by humanoids
for their loyalty and keen senses. Mastiffs can be trained
as guard dogs, hunting dogs, and war dogs. Halflings
and other Small humanoids ride them as mounts.
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Trampling Charge. If the mammoth moves at least 20 feet
straight toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack on
the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 18 Strength
saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone,
the mammoth can make one stomp attack against it as a
bonus action.

floV
Actions
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 25 (4d8 + 7) piercing damage.
Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone
creature. Hit; 29 (4dl0 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
A mammoth is an elephantine creature with thick
fur and long tusks. Stockier and fiercer than normal
elephants, mammoths inhabit a wide range of climes,
from subarctic to subtropical.
US CREATURES
Mule
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      10 (+0)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      10 (+0)       5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Beast of Burden. The mule is considered to be a Large animal
for the purpose of determining its carrying capacity.
Sure-Footed. The mule has advantage on Strength and
Dexterity saving throws made against effects that would
knock it prone.
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: A (ld4+ 2) bludgeoning damage.
Owl
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 5 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)       13 (+1)       8(-l)        2 (-4)      12 (+1)       7,fe2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
^7<       -
Flyby. The owl doesn't provoke opportunity attacks wheft it
flies out of an enemy's reach.
Keen Hearing and Sight. The owl has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight.
Actions
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 slashing damage.
Octopus
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 3 (ld6)
Speed 5 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
4 (-3)       15 (+2)      11 (+0)       3 (-4)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Hold Breath. While out of water, the octopus can hold its
breath for 30 minutes.
Underwater Camouflage. The octopus has advantage on
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made while underwater.
Water Breathing. The octopus can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 bludgeoning damage, and the target is grappled
(escape DC 10). Until this grapple ends, the octopus can't use
its tentacles on another target.
Ink Cloud (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). A 5-foot-
radius cloud of ink extends all around the octopus if it is
underwater. The area is heavily obscured for 1 minute,
although a significant current can disperse the ink. After
releasing the ink, the octopus can use the Dash action as a
bonus action.
Panther
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 50 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      15 (+2)      10 (+0)       3 (-4)      14 (+2)       7 (-2)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +6
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Smell. The panther has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Pounce. If the panther moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn,
that target must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the panther can make
one bite attack against it as a bonus action.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
X
APPENDIX A= WISCBLtAl
333
h
i'
334
Phase Spider
Large monstrosity, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
HitPoints32(5dlO + 5)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      15 (+2)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)      10 (+0)      6 (-2)
Skills Stealth +6
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —■
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Ethereal Jaunt. As a bonus action, the spider can magically
shift from the Material Plane to the Ethereal Plane, or
vice versa.
Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (ldlO + 2) piercing damage, and the target must make
a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) poison
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. If the poison damage reduces the target to 0
hit points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even
after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned
in this way.
A phase spider possesses the magical ability to phase
in and out of the Ethereal Plane. It seems to appear
but of nowhere and quickly vanishes after attacking. Its
movement on the Ethereal Plane before coming back to
the Material Plane makes it seem like it can teleport.
Phase Spider
/UtfEjJDIX At MISQEuAnBOTJS, CREATURES
">
Poisonous Snake
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       16 (+3)     11 (+0)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 10 ft, passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must make a DC 10
Constitution saving throw, taking 5 (2d4) poison damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Polar Bear
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 42 (5dl0 + 15)
Speed 40 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
20 (+5)      10 (+0)     16 (+3)      2 (-4)      13 (+1)      7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its bite and
one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (Id8 + 5) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Variant: Cave Bear
Some bears have adapted to life underground, feeding on
subterranean lichen and blind fish. Known as cave bears,
these ill-tempered behemoths have coarse, dark hair and
darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. Otherwise, they have the
same statistics as a polar bear.
Pony
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10 Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) Speed 40 ft.
STR          DEX         CON 15 (+2)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)	INT 2 (-4)	WIS 11 (+0)	CHA 7 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10 Languages — Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Quipper
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points! (Id4~l)
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       16 (+3)      9(-l)        1(-5)       7 (-2)       2 (-4)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The quipper has advantage on melee attack rolls
against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
Water Breathing. The quipper can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
A quipper is a carnivorous fish with sharp teeth.
Quippers can adapt to any aquatic environment,
including cold subterranean lakes. They frequently
gather in swarms; the statistics for a swarm of quippers
appear later in this appendix.
Rat
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 1 (ld4-l)
Speed 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       11 (+0)      9 (-1)        2 (-4)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Raven
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 1 (1d4-1)
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR           DEX        CON          INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       14 (+2)      8(-l)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)      6 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Mimicry. The raven can mimic simple sounds it has heard,
such as a person whispering, a baby crying, or an animal
chittering. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are
imitations with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check.
Actions
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Quippers
APPENDIX, #:'M;     I i !    ■ i
"1

Reef Shark
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
14 (+2)      13 (+1)      13 (+1)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      4 (-3)
Skills Perception +2
Senses Hindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Pack Tactics. The shark has advantage on an attack roll against
a creature if at least one of the shark's allies is within 5 feet of
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
Smaller than giant sharks and hunter sharks, reef
sharks inhabit shallow waters and coral reefs, gathering
in small packs to hunt. A full-grown specimen measures
6 to 10 feet long.
Rhinoceros
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6dl0+12)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
21 (+5)       8(-l)      15 (+2)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)      6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the rhinoceros moves at least 20 feet straight toward
a target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn,
the target takes an extra 9 (2d8) bludgeoning damage. If the
target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving
throw or be knocked prone.
Actions
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
336      W
APPENDIX A: MISCELLANEOUS CREATURES
*s
Riding Horse
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
HitPointsl3(2dlO + 2)
Speed 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      10 (+0)      12 (+1)       2 (-4)      11 (+0)       7 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Saber-Toothed Tiger
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 52 (7dl0+14)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      14 (+2)      15 (+2)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       8 (-1)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Keen Smell. The tiger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Pounce. If the tiger moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn,
that target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the tiger can make one
bite attack against it as a bonus action.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (ldl0+ 5) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage.
JSt
Scorpion
Tiny beast, unaligned
Actions
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1)
Speed 10 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       11 (+0)       8 (-1)        1 (-5)       8 (-1)        2 (-4)
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Actions
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must make a DC 9
Constitution saving throw, taking 4 (ld8) poison damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Sea Horse
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1)
Speed 0 ft., swim 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
1 (-5)       12 (+1)      8 (-1)        1 (-5)      10 (+0)      2 (-4)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 0 (0 XP)
Water Breathing. The sea horse can breathe only underwater.
Spider
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
2 (-4)       14 (+2)       8 (-1)        1 (-5)      10 (+0)      2 (-4)
Skills Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows
the exact location of any other creature in contact with
the same web.
Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 9
Constitution saving throw or take 2 (ld4) poison damage.
Swarm of Bats
Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
5 (-3)       15 (+2)     10 (+0)      2 (-4)      12 (+1)      4>(-3)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Echolocation. The swarm can't use its blindsight
while deafened.
Keen Hearing. The swarm has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing.
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny bat. The swarm can't regain hit points or
gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature
in the swarm's space. Hit: 5 (2d4) piercing damage, or 2 (ld4)
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer.
The Nature of Swarms
The swarms presented here aren't ordinary or benign
assemblies of little creatures. They form as a result of some
sinister or unwholesome influence. A vampire can summon
swarms of bats and rats from the darkest corners of the
night, while the very presence of a mummy lord can cause
scarab beetles to boil up from the sand-filled depths of its
tomb. A hag might have the power to turn swarms of ravens
against her enemies, while a yuan-ti abomination might have
swarms of poisonous snakes slithering in its wake. Even
druids can't charm these swarms, and their aggressiveness
is borderline unnatural.
Swarm of Insects
Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
3 (-4)       13 (+1)      10 (+0)       1 (-5)       7 (-2)        1 (-5)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny insect. The swarm can't regain hit points or
gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 0 ft., one target in
the swarm's space. Hit: 10 (4d4) piercing damage, or 5 (2d4)
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer.
Swarm of Poisonous Snakes
Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 36 (8d8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
8 (-1)       18 (+4)      11 (+0)       1 (-5)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny snake. The swarm can't regain hit points or
gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature
in the swarm's space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, or 3 (ld6)
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer.
The target must make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw,
taking 14 (4d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.



Variant: Insect Swarms
Different kinds of insects can gather in swarms, and each
swarm has the special characteristics described below.
Swarm of Beetles. A swarm of beetles gains a burrowing
speed of 5 feet.
Swarm of Centipedes. A creature reduced to 0 hit points
by a swarm of centipedes is stable but poisoned for 1
hour, even after regaining hit points, and paralyzed while
poisoned in this way.
Swarm of Spiders. A swarm of spiders has the following
additional traits.
Spider Climb. The swarm can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make
an ability check.
Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the swarm knows
the exact location of any other creature in contact with
the same web.
Web Walker. The swarm ignores movement restrictions
caused by webbing.
Swarm of Wasps. A swarm of wasps has a walking speed of
5 feet, a flying speed of 30 feet, and no climbing speed.
!WSBW!?SWWI
_ J1U JJIUMp
Swarm of Quippers
Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 28 (8d8 - 8)
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
13 (+1)       16 (+3)       9 (-1)
INT          WIS
1 (-5)       7 (-2)
CHA
2 (-4)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The swarm has advantage on melee attack rolls
against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points.
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny quipper. The swarm can't regain hit points or
gain temporary hit points.
Water Breathing. The swarm can breathe only underwater.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature
in the swarm's space. Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage, or 7 (2d6)
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer.
BIX A;  UISCELLANjBOUS CREATURES
-\

Swarm of Rats
Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 24 (7d8 - 7)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
9(-l)       11 (+0)       9(-l)        2 (-4)      10 (+0)      3 (-4)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Smell. The swarm has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny rat. The swarm can't regain hit points or gain
temporary hit points.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 0 ft., one target in
the swarm's space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, or 3 (1d6)
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer.
Swarm of Ravens
Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 24 (7d8 - 7)
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR
6 (-2)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
8{-1)
INT
3 (-4)
WIS
12 (+1)
CHA
6 (-2)
Skills Perception +5
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny raven. The swarm can't regain hit points or
gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Beaks. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target
in the swarm's space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, or 3 (ld6)
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer.
Tiger
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 37 (5dl0 + 10)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
17 (+3)      15 (+2)      14 (+2)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       8 fcl)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Smell. The tiger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Pounce. If the tiger moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn,
that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the tiger can make one
bite attack against it as a bonus action.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (IdlO + 3) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage.
Vulture
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 5 (ld8 + 1)
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
7 (-2)       10 (+0)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       4 (-3)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Sight and Smell. The vulture has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell.
Pack Tactics. The vulture has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the vulture's allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 2 (ld4) piercing damage.
APPENDIX *; MISCELIANI
339
Warhorse
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 19(3dl0 + 3)
Speed 60 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)       2 (-4)      12 (+1)       7 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Trampling Charge. If the horse moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a creature and then hits it with a hooves attack on
the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength
saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the
horse can make another attack with its hooves against it as a
bonus action.
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Variant: Warhorse Armor
An armored warhorse has an AC based on the type of barding
worn (see the Player's Handbook for more information on
barding). The horse's AC includes its Dexterity modifier,
where applicable. Barding doesn't alter the horse's
challenge rating.
AC	Barding	AC	Barding
12	Leather	16	Chain mail
13	Studded leather	17	Splint
14	Ring mail	18	Plate
15	Scale mail
Weasel Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 Hit Points 1 (ld4-l) Speed 30 ft.
STR 3 (-4)	DEX         CON 16 (+3)       8(-l)	INT 2 (-4)	WIS          CHA 12 (+1)       3 (-4)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The weasel has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Winter Wolf
Large monstrosity, neutral evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
HitPoints75(10dlO+20)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)       7 (-2)       12 (+1)       8 (-1)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +3
Damage Immunities cold
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages Common, Giant, Winter Wolf
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on an attack roll against a
creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Snow Camouflage. The wolf has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in snowy terrain.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.                                                  <
Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The wolf exhales a blast of freezing
wind in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a
DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) cold damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
The arctic-dwelling winter wolf is as large as a dire
wolf but has snow-white fur and pale blue eyes. Frost
giants use these evil creatures as guards and hunting
companions, putting the wolves' deadly breath weapon
to use against their foes. Winter wolves communicate
with one another using growls and barks, but they
speak Common and Giant well enough to follow simple
conversations.
Wolf
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
12 (+1)      15 (+2)      12 (+1)       3 (-4)      12 (+1)       6 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on attack rolls against a
creature if at least one of the wolfs allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.


WORG
Large monstrosity, neutral evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
HitPoints26(4d10 + 4)
Speed 50 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      13 (+1)      13 (+1)       7 (-2)      11 (+0)       8 (ul)
Skills Perception +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Goblin, Worg
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The worg has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
A worg is an evil predator that delights in hunting and
devouring creatures weaker than itself. Cunning and
malevolent, worgs roam across the remote wilderness
or are raised by goblins and hobgoblins. Those
creatures use worgs as mounts, but a worg will turn on
its rider if it feels mistreated or malnourished. Worgs
speak in their own language and Goblin, and a few learn
to speak Common as well.

Appendix B: Nonplayer Characters
This appendix contains statistics for various humanoid
nonplayer characters (NPCs) that adventurers might
encounter during a D&D campaign, including lowly
commoners and mighty archmages. These stat
blocks can be used to represent both human and
nonhuman NPCs.
Customizing NPCs
There are many easy ways to customize the NPCs in
this appendix for your home campaign.
Racial Traits. You can add racial traits to an NPC.
For example, a halfling druid might have a speed of 25
feet and the Lucky trait. Adding racial traits to an NPC
doesn't alter its challenge rating. For more on racial
traits, see the Player's Handbook.
Spell Swaps. One way to customize an NPC
spellcaster is to replace one or more of its spells. You
can substitute any spell on the NPCs spell list with a
different spell of the same level from the same spell list.
Swapping spells in this manner doesn't alter an NPCs
challenge rating.
Armor and Weapon Swaps. You can upgrade or
downgrade an NPCs armor, or add or switch weapons.
Adjustments to Armor Class and damage can change
an NPCs challenge rating, as explained in the Dungeon
Master's Guide.
Magic Items. The more powerful an NPC, the more
likely it has one or more magic items in its possession.
An archmage, for example, might have a magic staff or
wand, as well as one or more potions and scrolls. Giving
an NPC a potent damage-dealing magic item could alter
its challenge rating. Magic items, as well as adjusting
.a-creature's challenge rating, are described in the
Dungeon Master's Guide.
Acolyte
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 9 (2d8)
Speed 30 ft.
Actions
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      10 (+0)     14 (+2)     11 (+0)
Skills Medicine +4, Religion +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Spellcasting. The acolyte is a lst-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with
spell attacks). The acolyte has following cleric spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): light, sacred flame, thaumaturgy
1st level (3 slots): bless, cure wounds, sanctuary
Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage.
Acolytes are junior members of a clergy, usually
answerable to a priest. They perform a variety of
functions in a temple and are granted minor spellcasting
power by their deities.
Archmage
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 99 (18d8+18)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
10 (+0)
DEX         CON
14 (+2)      12 (+1)
INT          WIS
20 (+5)     15 (+2)
CHA
16 (+3)

Saving Throws Int +9, Wis +6
Skills Arcana +13, History+13
Damage Resistance damage from spells; nonmagical
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing (from stoneskin)
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages any six languages
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP)
Magic Resistance. The archmage has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Spellcasting. The archmage is an 18th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit
with spell attacks). The archmage can cast disguise self and
invisibility at will and has the following wizard spells prepared:
Cantrips (at w\\\): fire bolt, light, mage hand, prestidigitation,
shocking grasp
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, identify, mage armor,*
magic missile
2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, mirror image, misty step
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell,fy, lightning bolt
4th level (3 slots): banishment, fire shield, stoneskin*
5th level (3 slots): cone of cold, scrying, wall offeree
6th level (1 slot): globe of invulnerability
7th level (1 slot): teleport
8th level (1 slot): mind blank*
9th level (1 slot): time stop
*The archmage casts these spells on itself before combat.
Actions
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Archmages are powerful (and usually quite old)
spellcasters dedicated to the study of the arcane arts.
Benevolent ones counsel kings and queens, while evil
ones rule as tyrants and pursue lichdom. Those who are
neither good nor evil sequester themselves in remote
towers to practice their magic without interruption.
An archmage typically has one or more apprentice
mages, and an archmage's abode has numerous magical
wards and guardians to discourage interlopers.
X,
342
APPENDIX B: NONP1.AYKR CHARACTERS
AsfAS'SIN
Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment
Armor Class 15 (studded leather)
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      16 (+3)      14 (+2)      13 (+1)     11 (+0)      10 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex+7, lnt+5
Skills Acrobatics +7, Deception +4, Perception +4, Stealth +11
Damage Resistances poison
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Thieves' cant plus any two languages
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP)
Assassinate. During its first turn, the assassin has advantage
on attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken a turn.
Any hit the assassin scores against a surprised creature
is a critical hit.
Evasion. If the assassin is subjected to an effect that allows it
to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, the
assassin instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving
throw,, and only half damage if it fails.
Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The assassin deals an extra 13 (4d6)
damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has
advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is within 5
feet of an ally of the assassin that isn't incapacitated and the
assassin doesn't have disadvantage on the attack roll.
Actions
Multiattack. The assassin makes two shortsword attacks.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must
make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6)
poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 80/320
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage, and the target
must make a DC 15 Constitution savingthrow, taking 24 (7d6)
poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Trained in the use of poison, assassins are remorseless
killers who work for nobles, guildmasters, sovereigns,
and anyone else who can afford them.
Bandit
Medium humanoid (any race), any non-lawful alignment
Armor Class 12 (leather armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR          DEX         CON 11 (+0)      12 (+1)      12 (+1)	INT 10 (+0)	WIS 10 (+0)	CHA io (+o)
Senses passive Perception 10 Languages any one language (usually Com Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one''
target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.
Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 80
ft./320 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage.
Archmage
Bandits rove in gangs and are sometimes led by thugs,
veterans, or spellcasters. Not all bandits are evil.
Oppression, drought, disease, or famine can often drive
otherwise honest folk to a life of banditry.
Pirates are bandits of the high seas. They might be
freebooters interested only in treasure and murder, or
they might be privateers sanctioned by the crown to
attack and plunder an enemy nation's vessels.
Bandit Captain
Medium humanoid (any race), any non-lawful alignment
Armor Class 15 (studded leather)
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR
15 (+2)
DEX         CON
16 (+3)      14 (+2)
INT
14 (+2)
WIS
11 (+0)
CHA
14 (+2)
Saving Throws Str +4, Dex +5, Wis +2
Skills Athletics +4, Deception +4
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any two languages
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The captain makes three melee attacks: two with
its scimitar and one with its dagger. Or the captain makes two
ranged attacks with its daggers.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage
Reactions
Parry. The captain adds 2 to its AC against one melee attack
that would hit it. To do so, the captain must see the attacker
and be wielding a melee weapon.
It takes a strong personality, ruthless
cunning, and a silver tongue to keep a gang
of bandits in line. The bandit captain has
these qualities in spades.
In addition to managing a crew of selfish
malcontents, the pirate captain is a variation
of the bandit captain, with a ship to protect and
command. To keep the crew in line, the captain must
mete out rewards and punishment on a regular basis.
More than treasure, a bandit captain or pirate captain
craves infamy. A prisoner who appeals to the captain's
vanity or ego is more likely to be treated fairly than a
prisoner who does not or claims not to know anything
of the captain's colorful reputation.
Berserker
Medium humanoid [any race), any chaotic alignment
Armor Class 13 (hide armor)
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      12 (+1)      17 (+3)       9(-l)      11 (+0)       9(-l)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Reckless. At the start of its turn, the berserker can gain
advantage on all melee weapon attack rolls during that turn,
but attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of
its next turn.
Actions
Creataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (ldl2+ 3) slashing damage.
Hailing from uncivilized lands, unpredictable
berserkers come together in war parties and seek
conflict wherever they can find it.
Banoit Captain
Commoner
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 4 (1d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR          DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)     10 (+0)
Cult Fanatic
Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Actions
each 5 ft., one target.
Hit! 2 (ld4) bludgeoning damage.
Commoners include peasants, serfs, slaves, servants,
pilgrims, merchants, artisans, and hermits.
GULTIST
Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment
Armor Class 12 (leather armor)
Hit Points 9 (2d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      12 (+1)     10 (+0)     10 (+0)     11 (+0)     10 (+0)
Skills Deception +2, Religion +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Dark Devotion. The cultist has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed or frightened.
Actions
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.
Cultists swear allegiance to dark powers such as
elemental princes, demon lords, or archdevils. Most
conceal their loyalties to avoid being ostracized,
imprisoned, or executed for their beliefs. Unlike evil
acolytes, cultists often show signs of insanity in their
beliefs and practices.
Armor Class 13 (leather armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)      10 (+0)     13 (+1)      14 (+2)
Skills Deception +4, Persuasion +4, Religion +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Dark Devotion. The fanatic has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed or frightened.
Spellcasting. The fanatic is a 4th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11, +3 to hit
with spell attacks). The fanatic has the following cleric
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): light, sacred flame, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): command, inflict wounds, shield of faith
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, spiritual weapon
Actions
Multiattack. The fanatic makes two melee attacks.
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to
hit, reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one creature.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Fanatics are often part of a cult's
leadership, using their
charisma and dogma to
influence and prey on
those of weak will.
Most are interested
in personal power
above all else.
Cult Fanatic
Druid
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 11 (16 with barkskiri)
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      12 (+1)      13 (+1)       12 (+1)      15 (+2)      11 (+0)
Skills Medicine +4, Nature +3, Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Druidic plus any two languages
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Spellcasting. The druid is a 4th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with
spell attacks). It has the following druid spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, produce flame, shillelagh
1st level (4 slots): entangle, longstrider, speak with
animals, thunderwave
2nd level (3 slots): animal messenger, barkskin
Actions
Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit (+4 to hit with
shillelagh), reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (ld6) bludgeoning
damage, or 4 (ld8) bludgeoning damage with shillelagh or if
wielded with two hands.
Druids dwell in forests and other secluded wilderness
locations, where they protect the natural world from
monsters and the encroachment of civilization. Some
are tribal shamans who heal the sick, pray to animal
spirits, and provide spiritual guidance.
Gladiator
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 16 (studded leather, shield)
Hit Points 112 (15d8 +45)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
18 (+4)      15 (+2)      16 (+3)      10 (+0)     12 (+1)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Str +7, Dex +5, Con +6
Skills Athletics +10, Intimidation +5
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Brave. The gladiator has advantage on saving throws against
being frightened.
Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra dieof its damage when the
gladiator hits with it (included in the attack).
Actions
Multiattack. The gladiator makes three melee attacks or two
ranged attacks.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. and
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage,
or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to
make a melee attack.
Shield Bash. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target
is a Medium or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 15
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Reactions
Parry. The gladiator adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack
that would hit it. To,d,o so, the gladiator must see the attacker
and be wielding a melee weapon.
Gladiators battle for the entertainment of raucous
crowds. Some gladiators are brutal pit fighters who treat
each match as a life-or-death struggle, while others are
professional duelists who command huge fees but rarely
fight to the death.
Guard
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 16 (chain shirt, shield)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR          DEX         CON          INT          WIS          CHA
13 (+1)      12 (+1)      12 (+1)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)     10 (+0)
Skills Perception +2
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage.
Guards include members of a city watch, sentries
in a citadel or fortified town, and the bodyguards of
merchants and nobles.
Knight
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 52 (8d8+ 16)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      11 (+0)      14 (+2)      11 (+0)     11 (+0)      15 (+2)
Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Brave. The knight has advantage on saving throws against
being frightened.
Actions
Multiattack. The knight makes two melee attacks.
Creatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, range
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ldlO) piercing damage.
Leadership (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1
minute, the knight can utter a special command or warning
whenever a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet of
it makes an attack roll or a saving throw. The creature can add
a d4 to its roll provided it can hear and understand the knight.
A creature can benefit from only one Leadership die at a time.
This effect ends if the knight is incapacitated.
Reactions
Parry. The knight adds 2 to its AC against one melee attack that
would hit it. To do so, the knight must see the attacker and be
wielding a melee weapon.
Knights are warriors who pledge service to rulers,
religious orders, and noble causes. A knight's alignment
determines the extent to which a pledge is honored.
Whether undertaking a quest or patrolling a realm^a
knight often travels with an entourage that includes
squires and hirelings who are commoners.
Mage
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 40 (9d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR          DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
9(-l)       14 (+2)      11 (+0)      17 (+3)      12 (+1)      11 (+0)
Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +4
Skills Arcana +6, History +6
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages any four languages
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP)
Spellcasting. The mage is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to
hit with spell attacks). The mage has the following wizard
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will):^re bolt, light, mage hand, prestidigitation
1st level (4 slots): detect magic, mage armor, magic
missile, shield
2nd level (3 slots): misty step, suggestion
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fireball, fly
4th level (3 slots): greater invisibility, ice storm
5th level (1 slot): cone of cold
Actions
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Mages spend their lives in the study and practice of
magic. Good-aligned mages offer counsel to nobles
and others in power, while evil mages dwell in isolated
sites to perform unspeakable experiments without
interference.
Variant: Familiars
Any spellcaster that can cast the find familiar spell (such as
an archmage or mage) is likely to have a familiar. The familiar
can be one of the creatures described in the spell (see the
Player's Handbook) or some other Tiny monster, such as a
crawling claw, imp, pseudodragon, or quasit.
Noble
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 15 (breastplate)
Hit Points 9 (2d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      12 (+1)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)      14 (+2)      16 (+3)
Skills Deception +5, Insight+4, Persuasion +5
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any two languages
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage.
The noble adds 2 to its AC against one melee attack that
would hit it. To do so, the noble must see the attacker and be
wielding a melee weapon.
Nobles wield great authority and influence as members
of the upper class, possessing wealth and connections
that can make them as powerful as monarchs and
generals. A noble often travels in the company of guards,
as well as servants who are commoners.
The noble's statistics can also be used to represent
courtiers who aren't of noble birth.
Priest
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 13 (chain shirt)
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5)
Speed 25 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      10 (+0)      12 (+1)       13 (+1)      16 (+3)      13 (+1)
Skills Medicine +7, Persuasion +3, Religion +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages any two languages
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Divine Eminence. As a bonus action, the priest can expend a
spell slot to cause its melee weapon attacks to magically deal
an extra 10 (3d6) radiant damage to a target on a hit. This
benefit lasts until the end of the turn. If the priest expends a
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the extra damage increases by
ld6 for each level above 1st.
Spellcasting. The priest is a 5th-level spellcaster. Its
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 13, +5 to
hit with spell attacks). The priest has the following cleric
spells prepared:
Cantrips (at will): light, sacred flame, thaumaturgy
1st level (4 slots): cure wounds, guiding boh, sanctuary
2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration,
spiritual weapon
3rd level (2 slots): dispel magic, spirit guardians
Actions
Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (ld6)
bludgeoning damage.
Priests bring the teachings of their
gods to the common folk. They are
the spiritual leaders of temples and shrines
and often hold positions of influence in their
communities. Evil priests might work openly
under a tyrant, or they might be the leaders of
religious sects hidden in the shadows of good
society, overseeing depraved rites.
A priest typically has one or more acolytes
to help with religious ceremonies and other
sacred duties.
Scout
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 13 (leather armor)
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
11 (+0)      14 (+2)      12 (+1)      11 (+0)     13 (+1)      11 (+0)
Skills Nature +4, Perception +5, Stealth +6, Survival +5
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Keen Hearing and Sight. The scout has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The scout makes two melee attacks or two
ranged attacks.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, ranged
150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
Scouts are skilled hunters and trackers who offer
their services for a fee. Most hunt wild game, but
a few work as bounty hunters, serve as guides, or
provide military reconnaissance.
Spy
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 27 (6d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
10 (+0)      15 (+2)      10 (+0)      12 (+1)     14 (+2)      16 (+3)
Skills Deception +5, Insight +4, Investigation +5, Perception +6
Persuasion +5, Sleight of Hand +4, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 16
Languages any two languages
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Cunning Action. On each of its turns, the spy can use a bonus
action to take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action.
Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The spy deals an extra 7 (2d6)
damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and
has advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is
within 5 feet of an ally of the spy that isn't incapacitated
and the spy doesn't have disadvantage on the
attack roll.
Actions
Multiattack. The spy makes two melee attacks.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld6+ 2) piercing damage.
Rulers, nobles, merchants, guildmasters, and other
wealthy individuals use spies to gain the upper hand in
a world of cutthroat politics. A spy is trained to secretly
gather information. Loyal spies would rather die than
divulge information that could compromise them or
their employers.
Thug
Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment
Armor Class 11 (leather armor)
Hit Points 32 (5d8+ 10)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
15 (+2)      11 (+0)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)     10 (+0)      11 (+0)
Skills Intimidation +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Pack Tactics. The thug has advantage on an attack roll against
a creature if at least one of the thug's allies is within 5 feet of
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The thug makes two melee attacks.
Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, range
100/400 ftn one target. Hit: 5 (ldlO) piercing damage.
Thugs are .ruthless enforcers skilled at intimidation and
Violence. They work for money and have few scruples.
Tribal Warrior
Medium humanoifl (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 12 (hide armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON
13 (+1)      11 (+0)      12 (+1)
INT          WIS          CHA
8(-l)      11 (+0)       8(-l)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Pack Tactics. The warrior has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the warrior's allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Actions
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage, or
5 (ld8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
Tribal warriors live beyond civilization, most often
subsisting on fishing and hunting. Each tribe acts in
accordance with the wishes of its chief, who is the
greatest or oldest warrior of the tribe or a tribe member
blessed by the gods.
Veteran
Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment
Armor Class 17 (splint)
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18)
Speed 30 ft.
STR           DEX         CON           INT          WIS          CHA
16 (+3)      13 (+1)      14 (+2)      10 (+0)     11 (+0)     10 (+0)
Skills Athletics +5, Perception +2
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The veteran makes two longsword attacks. If it
has a shortsword drawn, it can also make a shortsword attack.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (ldlO + 3)
slashing damage if used with two hands.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage. Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ldlO) piercing damage. Veterans are professional fighters that take up arms for pay or to protect something they believe in or value. Their ranks include soldiers retired from long service and warriors who never served anyone but themselves. Thug
Fantasy Bestiary
The Monster Manual presents a horde of
classic Dungeons & Dragons" creatures,
including dragons, giants, mind flayers, and
beholders — a monstrous feast for Dungeon
Masters ready to challenge their players and
populate their adventures.
The monsters contained herein are culled from
the D&D games illustrious history, with easy-
to-use game statistics and thrilling stories to
feed your imagination.
When you're ready for even more, expand
your adventures with the fifth edition Player's
Handbook" and Dungeon Master's Guide'.



PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

By Jane Austen



Chapter 1


It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.

"My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?"

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

"But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it."

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

"Do you not want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife impatiently.

"_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."

This was invitation enough.

"Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he
is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to
be in the house by the end of next week."

"What is his name?"

"Bingley."

"Is he married or single?"

"Oh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or
five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!"

"How so? How can it affect them?"

"My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome! You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them."

"Is that his design in settling here?"

"Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes."

"I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the
party."

"My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty."

"In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of."

"But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
the neighbourhood."

"It is more than I engage for, I assure you."

"But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to
go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no
newcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to
visit him if you do not."

"You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy."

"I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference."

"They have none of them much to recommend them," replied he; "they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than her sisters."

"Mr. Bennet, how _can_ you abuse your own children in such a way? You
take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves."

"You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these last twenty years at least."

"Ah, you do not know what I suffer."

"But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood."

"It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
visit them."

"Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all."

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented,
she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.



Chapter 2


Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring
his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
suddenly addressed her with:

"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy."

"We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes," said her mother
resentfully, "since we are not to visit."

"But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him."

"I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of her."

"No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you."

Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.

"Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! Have a little
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces."

"Kitty has no discretion in her coughs," said her father; "she times
them ill."

"I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully. "When is
your next ball to be, Lizzy?"

"To-morrow fortnight."

"Aye, so it is," cried her mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come back
till the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,
for she will not know him herself."

"Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. Bingley to _her_."

"Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
myself; how can you be so teasing?"

"I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is certainly
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture somebody else will; and after all,
Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance; and, therefore, as
she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will
take it on myself."

The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, "Nonsense,
nonsense!"

"What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried he. "Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read
great books and make extracts."

Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how.

"While Mary is adjusting her ideas," he continued, "let us return to Mr.
Bingley."

"I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried his wife.

"I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me that before? If
I had known as much this morning I certainly would not have called
on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now."

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
while.

"How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should
persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said a
word about it till now."

"Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose," said Mr. Bennet; and,
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.

"What an excellent father you have, girls!" said she, when the door was
shut. "I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball."

"Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I'm the tallest."

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him to
dinner.



Chapter 3


Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained.

"If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,"
said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for."

In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about
ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had
heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper
window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.

An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already
had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unable
to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears
a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get
a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.
The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only
six with him from London--his five sisters and a cousin. And when
the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five
altogether--Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and
another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report which was in general circulation within five minutes
after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he
was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
proud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all
his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most
forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared
with his friend.

Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving
one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man
in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
having slighted one of her daughters.

Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr.
Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friend
to join it.

"Come, Darcy," said he, "I must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance."

"I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this
it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with."

"I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Mr. Bingley, "for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in
my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
uncommonly pretty."

"_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.

"Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you."

"Which do you mean?" and turning round he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:
"She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me."

Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story,
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.

The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as
her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With
a book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views on
the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a
different story to hear.

"Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet," as she entered the room, "we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
her twice! Only think of _that_, my dear; he actually danced with her
twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
up with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King,
and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,
and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--"

"If he had had any compassion for _me_," cried her husband impatiently,
"he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more of
his partners. Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!"

"Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively
handsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw
anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.
Hurst's gown--"

Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.

"But I can assure you," she added, "that Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man."



Chapter 4


When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very
much she admired him.

"He is just what a young man ought to be," said she, "sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much
ease, with such perfect good breeding!"

"He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man ought
likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete."

"I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment."

"Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman
in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person."

"Dear Lizzy!"

"Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your
life."

"I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think."

"I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the
good of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters,
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his."

"Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her."

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,
and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she
was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine
ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and
conceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the
first private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of
associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect
entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were of
a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply
impressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and their
own had been acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an
estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.

His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but,
though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table--nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation
to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for
half-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principal
rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it
immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.
In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were not
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually
giving offense.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or
prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive
to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt
acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not
conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a
collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for
none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received
either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,
but she smiled too much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one
whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose.



Chapter 5


Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.
The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a
disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;
and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house
about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,
where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,
unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all
the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him
supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By
nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St.
James's had made him courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth's intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over
a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.

"_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet with civil
self-command to Miss Lucas. "_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice."

"Yes; but he seemed to like his second better."

"Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson."

"Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many
pretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'"

"Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know."

"_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza," said
Charlotte. "Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_."

"I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips."

"Are you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?" said Jane.
"I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her."

"Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry at
being spoke to."

"Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that he never speaks much,
unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable."

"I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to
the ball in a hack chaise."

"I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but I
wish he had danced with Eliza."

"Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, "I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you."

"I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him."

"His pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud."

"That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_."

"Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, "is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may
be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us."

"If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas, who came with
his sisters, "I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day."

"Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs.
Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly."

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.



Chapter 6


The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit
was soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew on
the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards
the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment
of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in
all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. It
was generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a
uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions
of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.

"It may perhaps be pleasant," replied Charlotte, "to be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in
the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show _more_
affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on."

"But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to
discover it too."

"Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do."

"But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal
it, he must find it out."

"Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for
falling in love as much as she chooses."

"Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth, "where nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married, and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But
these are not Jane's feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet,
she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its
reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character."

"Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have also been spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal."

"Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they
both like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded."

"Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; and
if she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a
twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life."

"You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself."

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly
had a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of
this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough
to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so
drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party were
assembled.

"What does Mr. Darcy mean," said she to Charlotte, "by listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?"

"That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer."

"But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him."

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such
a subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she
turned to him and said:

"Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly
well just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?"

"With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a lady
energetic."

"You are severe on us."

"It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased," said Miss Lucas. "I am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows."

"You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken
a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers." On Miss Lucas's persevering, however,
she added, "Very well, if it must be so, it must." And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, "There is a fine old saying, which everybody here is of
course familiar with: 'Keep your breath to cool your porridge'; and I
shall keep mine to swell my song."

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that
she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display.

Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who,
with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room.

Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was
his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:

"What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There
is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished society."

"Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance."

Sir William only smiled. "Your friend performs delightfully," he
continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; "and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy."

"You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir."

"Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
you often dance at St. James's?"

"Never, sir."

"Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?"

"It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it."

"You have a house in town, I conclude?"

Mr. Darcy bowed.

"I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fond
of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas."

He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed
to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her:

"My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before you."
And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William:

"Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner."

Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.

"You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny
me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half-hour."

"Mr. Darcy is all politeness," said Elizabeth, smiling.

"He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza,
we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such a
partner?"

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not
injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:

"I can guess the subject of your reverie."

"I should imagine not."

"You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings
in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.
I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--the
nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would
I give to hear your strictures on them!"

"Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow."

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity:

"Miss Elizabeth Bennet."

"Miss Elizabeth Bennet!" repeated Miss Bingley. "I am all astonishment.
How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish you
joy?"

"That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady's
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy."

"Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is
absolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed;
and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you."

He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her
that all was safe, her wit flowed long.



Chapter 7


Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk to
their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.

The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and
to a milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news
the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some
from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the
neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the
headquarters.

Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the most
interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge
of the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a
secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.
Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of
felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and
Mr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animation
to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the
regimentals of an ensign.

After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed:

"From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced."

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter,
and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
next morning to London.

"I am astonished, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "that you should be so
ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly
of anybody's children, it should not be of my own, however."

"If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it."

"Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever."

"This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish."

"My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when
I liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,
should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's in
his regimentals."

"Mamma," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library."

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with
a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,

"Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love."

"It is from Miss Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud.

"MY DEAR FRIEND,--

"If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me,
we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,
for a whole day's tete-a-tete between two women can never end without a
quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the
gentlemen are to dine with the officers.--Yours ever,

"CAROLINE BINGLEY"

"With the officers!" cried Lydia. "I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_."

"Dining out," said Mrs. Bennet, "that is very unlucky."

"Can I have the carriage?" said Jane.

"No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night."

"That would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth, "if you were sure that
they would not offer to send her home."

"Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton,
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs."

"I had much rather go in the coach."

"But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?"

"They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them."

"But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth, "my mother's purpose
will be answered."

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a
bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before
it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back.

"This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" said Mrs. Bennet more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the
next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:

"MY DEAREST LIZZY,--

"I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not
hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr.
Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been
to me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the
matter with me.--Yours, etc."

"Well, my dear," said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, "if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she
should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders."

"Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little trifling
colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is
all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage."

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though
the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking
was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

"How can you be so silly," cried her mother, "as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there."

"I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want."

"Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said her father, "to send for the
horses?"

"No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing
when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner."

"I admire the activity of your benevolence," observed Mary, "but every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required."

"We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.

"If we make haste," said Lydia, as they walked along, "perhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter before he goes."

In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.

She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother's manners there was something better than politeness; there
was good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr.
Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as
to the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not
well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,
however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them
together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended
her.

When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught
a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in
fact, nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present.
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to
Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply
of clothes.



Chapter 8


At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a very
favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.

When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;
she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the
same, and added:

"She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent
walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really
looked almost wild."

"She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!"

"Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its office."

"Your picture may be very exact, Louisa," said Bingley; "but this was
all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably
well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice."

"_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure," said Miss Bingley; "and I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your_ sister make such
an exhibition."

"Certainly not."

"To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean by
it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country-town indifference to decorum."

"It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing," said
Bingley.

"I am afraid, Mr. Darcy," observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, "that
this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes."

"Not at all," he replied; "they were brightened by the exercise." A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again:

"I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very
sweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with
such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is
no chance of it."

"I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton."

"Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside."

"That is capital," added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.

"If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside," cried Bingley, "it
would not make them one jot less agreeable."

"But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world," replied Darcy.

To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend's vulgar relations.

With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and
when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay
below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

"Do you prefer reading to cards?" said he; "that is rather singular."

"Miss Eliza Bennet," said Miss Bingley, "despises cards. She is a great
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else."

"I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cried Elizabeth; "I am
_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things."

"In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure," said Bingley; "and
I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well."

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the
table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her
others--all that his library afforded.

"And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever looked into."

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room.

"I am astonished," said Miss Bingley, "that my father should have left
so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!"

"It ought to be good," he replied, "it has been the work of many
generations."

"And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying
books."

"I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these."

"Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley."

"I wish it may."

"But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire."

"With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it."

"I am talking of possibilities, Charles."

"Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation."

Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very
little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew
near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his
eldest sister, to observe the game.

"Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?" said Miss Bingley; "will
she be as tall as I am?"

"I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or
rather taller."

"How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much. Such a countenance, such manners! And so extremely accomplished
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite."

"It is amazing to me," said Bingley, "how young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished as they all are."

"All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?"

"Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
net purses. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sure
I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being
informed that she was very accomplished."

"Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy, "has
too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my
acquaintance, that are really accomplished."

"Nor I, I am sure," said Miss Bingley.

"Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman."

"Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it."

"Oh! certainly," cried his faithful assistant, "no one can be really
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides
all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be but half-deserved."

"All this she must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this she must
yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by
extensive reading."

"I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_."

"Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
this?"

"I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe united."

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room.

"Elizabeth Bennet," said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,
"is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the
other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it
succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art."

"Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
"there is a meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable."

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject.

Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent for
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief
to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every
attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.



Chapter 9


Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

"Indeed I have, sir," was her answer. "She is a great deal too ill to be
moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness."

"Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of her removal."

"You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
"that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she
remains with us."

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.

"I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers
a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are
nothing to _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a
charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the
country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it
in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease."

"Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here."

"That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth.

"You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her.

"Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly."

"I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through I am afraid is pitiful."

"That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate
character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours."

"Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home."

"I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you were a
studier of character. It must be an amusing study."

"Yes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
least that advantage."

"The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subjects for
such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
unvarying society."

"But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever."

"Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning
a country neighbourhood. "I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town."

Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
victory over him, continued her triumph.

"I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?"

"When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it;
and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either."

"Aye--that is because you have the right disposition. But that
gentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothing
at all."

"Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for her
mother. "You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town,
which you must acknowledge to be true."

"Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting
with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families."

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.

"Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So
genteel and easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter."

"Did Charlotte dine with you?"

"No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work;
_my_ daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls,
I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think
Charlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend."

"She seems a very pleasant young woman."

"Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast
of my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own
partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother
Gardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was
sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he
did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses
on her, and very pretty they were."

"And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth impatiently. "There has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!"

"I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said Darcy.

"Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away."

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part
indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own
easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was very
equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and
abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most
shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this
sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:

"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill."

Lydia declared herself satisfied. "Oh! yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball," she
added, "I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not."

Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.



Chapter 10


The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear.
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.

Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual
commendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in union with her opinion of each.

"How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!"

He made no answer.

"You write uncommonly fast."

"You are mistaken. I write rather slowly."

"How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!"

"It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours."

"Pray tell your sister that I long to see her."

"I have already told her so once, by your desire."

"I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend
pens remarkably well."

"Thank you--but I always mend my own."

"How can you contrive to write so even?"

He was silent.

"Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp;
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley's."

"Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At
present I have not room to do them justice."

"Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?"

"They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me
to determine."

"It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with
ease, cannot write ill."

"That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried her
brother, "because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much for
words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?"

"My style of writing is very different from yours."

"Oh!" cried Miss Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest."

"My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents."

"Your humility, Mr. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof."

"Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance of
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast."

"And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?"

"The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?"

"Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour,
I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies."

"I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that
you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had better
stay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably not
go--and at another word, might stay a month."

"You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley did
not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much
more than he did himself."

"I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a
circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could."

"Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentions
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?"

"Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for
himself."

"You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
one argument in favour of its propriety."

"To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you."

"To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either."

"You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?"

"Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to
arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?"

"By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure
you, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not
know a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do."

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.

"I see your design, Bingley," said his friend. "You dislike an argument,
and want to silence this."

"Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me."

"What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Darcy had much better finish his letter."

Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.

When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity
to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead
the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
seated herself.

Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed,
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixed
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her
because he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine,
however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation.

After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by
a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to her:

"Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?"

She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some
surprise at her silence.

"Oh!" said she, "I heard you before, but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say 'Yes,'
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all--and now despise me if
you dare."

"Indeed I do not dare."

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy
had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really
believed, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
should be in some danger.

Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.

"I hope," said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery
the next day, "you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after
officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses."

"Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?"

"Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
lines. As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not have it taken, for
what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?"

"It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied."

At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself.

"I did not know that you intended to walk," said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard.

"You used us abominably ill," answered Mrs. Hurst, "running away without
telling us that you were coming out."

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,
and immediately said:

"This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the
avenue."

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered:

"No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear
to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Good-bye."

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.



Chapter 11


When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her
sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the
drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many
professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.
Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an
entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh
at their acquaintance with spirit.

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed
himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also
made her a slight bow, and said he was "very glad;" but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy and
attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from
the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone
else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight.

When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and
the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets
and rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss
Bennet.

Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
Darcy's progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she
was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasant
it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no
enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library."

No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said:

"By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are
not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure."

"If you mean Darcy," cried her brother, "he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send
round my cards."

"I should like balls infinitely better," she replied, "if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of
the day."

"Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be
near so much like a ball."

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked
about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but
Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In
the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and,
turning to Elizabeth, said:

"Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
long in one attitude."

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
interfere. "What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his
meaning?"--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?

"Not at all," was her answer; "but depend upon it, he means to be severe
on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing
about it."

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in
anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his
two motives.

"I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. "You either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other's confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be
completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire."

"Oh! shocking!" cried Miss Bingley. "I never heard anything so
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?"

"Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said Elizabeth. "We
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate
as you are, you must know how it is to be done."

"But upon my honour, I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has
not yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of manner and presence of
mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will
not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a
subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself."

"Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth. "That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintances. I dearly love a
laugh."

"Miss Bingley," said he, "has given me more credit than can be.
The wisest and the best of men--nay, the wisest and best of their
actions--may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in
life is a joke."

"Certainly," replied Elizabeth--"there are such people, but I hope I
am not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good.
Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own,
and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely
what you are without."

"Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study
of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule."

"Such as vanity and pride."

"Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation."

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

"Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume," said Miss Bingley;
"and pray what is the result?"

"I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it
himself without disguise."

"No," said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding--certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others
so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings
are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost
forever."

"_That_ is a failing indeed!" cried Elizabeth. "Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me."

"There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil--a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome."

"And _your_ defect is to hate everybody."

"And yours," he replied with a smile, "is willfully to misunderstand
them."

"Do let us have a little music," cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which she had no share. "Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst?"

Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments' recollection, was not sorry for
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.



Chapter 12


In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them
very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work
on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
she felt herself to be right.

To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence--Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teasing than usual to himself.
He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope
of influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were
at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her
to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of
its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth.

They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human
nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations of
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been flogged, and it
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.



Chapter 13


"I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, "that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party."

"Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in--and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home."

"The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger."

Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled. "A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.
Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr.
Bingley. But--good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to be
got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell--I must speak to Hill this
moment."

"It is _not_ Mr. Bingley," said her husband; "it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life."

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:

"About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago
I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring
early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead,
may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases."

"Oh! my dear," cried his wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it."

Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They
had often attempted to do it before, but it was a subject on which
Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.

"It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "and
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little
softened by his manner of expressing himself."

"No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did
before him?"

"Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear."

"Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October.

"Dear Sir,--

"The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the
misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; but
for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might
seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone
with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.--'There, Mrs.
Bennet.'--My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having
received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be
distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de
Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has
preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be
my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her
ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which
are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I
feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in
all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I
flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, and
that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate
will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the
offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for
it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible
amends--but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to
receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting
on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and
shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight
following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine
is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided
that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.--I
remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and
daughters, your well-wisher and friend,

"WILLIAM COLLINS"

"At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,"
said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. "He seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again."

"There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him."

"Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way he can mean
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
credit."

Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
his parishioners whenever it were required.

"He must be an oddity, I think," said she. "I cannot make him
out.--There is something very pompous in his style.--And what can he
mean by apologising for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose he
would help it if he could.--Could he be a sensible man, sir?"

"No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him."

"In point of composition," said Mary, "the letter does not seem
defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed."

To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in
need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a
tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in this
instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did
not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily.

"You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
oddly."

"You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate."

"Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things
I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed."

"I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted--"

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet's
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and
he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of its
cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who
assured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a
good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He
begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a
quarter of an hour.



Chapter 14


During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for
his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect
he protested that "he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in
a person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of
preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or
two, to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself--some shelves in the closet up stairs."

"That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "and
I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?"

"The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, her ladyship's residence."

"I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?"

"She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, "then she is better off than
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?"

"She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks
the young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in many
accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies."

"Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
court."

"Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the
British court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable
to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that
her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay."

"You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet, "and it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?"

"They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible."

Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd
as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner
in his pleasure.

By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,
glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily
assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everything
announced it to be from a circulating library), he started back, and
begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at
him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some
deliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the
volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three
pages, she interrupted him with:

"Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning away
Richard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me
so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town."

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:

"I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes
me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin."

Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at
backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia's
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
for backgammon.



Chapter 15


Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part
of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a
good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which
he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.

Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father's
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
part.

His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a
quarter of an hour's tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. "As to
her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession; her
_eldest_ daughter, she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her
to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged."

Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
the day before was now high in her good graces.

Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such
doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the
house, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go.

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes were
immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and
nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in
a shop window, could recall them.

But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer was
the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came
to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the
stranger's air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia,
determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under
pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately
had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had
reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated
permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with
him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a
commission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the
young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming.
His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of
beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.
The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness
of conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and
unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together
very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy
and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the
ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and
began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and
Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to
Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated
it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes
on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the
stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they
looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.
Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham,
after a few moments, touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just
deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to
imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.

In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.

Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Phillip's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's
pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of
Mrs. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the
invitation.

Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,
from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was
eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as
their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing
about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in the
street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to
Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility
was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. She
received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with
as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous
acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself,
however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who
introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such an
excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon
put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom,
however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that
Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a
lieutenant's commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the
last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr.
Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the
occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become "stupid,
disagreeable fellows." Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses
the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured
with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.

As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either
or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain
such behaviour than her sister.

Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring
Mrs. Phillips's manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;
for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life.



Chapter 16


As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their
aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and
the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in
the house.

When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast
parlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much
gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him what
Rosings was, and who was its proprietor--when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper's room.

In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and
the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive
listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the
interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.
The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.

Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feel
that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered
interesting by the skill of the speaker.

With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young
ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind
listener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly
supplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he
had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist.

"I know little of the game at present," said he, "but I shall be glad
to improve myself, for in my situation in life--" Mrs. Phillips was very
glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.

Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there
seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing him entirely, for she was a most
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore
at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear
him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be
told--the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not
even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.

"About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
drop, added, "He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I
understand."

"Yes," replied Mr. Wickham; "his estate there is a noble one. A clear
ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more
capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for
I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my
infancy."

Elizabeth could not but look surprised.

"You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?"

"As much as I ever wish to be," cried Elizabeth very warmly. "I have
spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
disagreeable."

"I have no right to give _my_ opinion," said Wickham, "as to his being
agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him
too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_
to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general
astonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly
anywhere else. Here you are in your own family."

"Upon my word, I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in
the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in
Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find
him more favourably spoken of by anyone."

"I cannot pretend to be sorry," said Wickham, after a short
interruption, "that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen."

"I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
ill-tempered man." Wickham only shook his head.

"I wonder," said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, "whether he is
likely to be in this country much longer."

"I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I
was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood."

"Oh! no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_
wishes to avoid seeing _me_, he must go. We are not on friendly terms,
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense
of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he
is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never
be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by
a thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the
memory of his father."

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.

Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that
he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very
intelligible gallantry.

"It was the prospect of constant society, and good society," he added,
"which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to be
a most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted me
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them.
Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.
A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have
now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I
was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
were speaking of just now."

"Indeed!"

"Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
elsewhere."

"Good heavens!" cried Elizabeth; "but how could _that_ be? How could his
will be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress?"

"There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the
intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
to it by extravagance, imprudence--in short anything or nothing. Certain
it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was
of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and
I may have spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too freely. I can
recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort
of men, and that he hates me."

"This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced."

"Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till I
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_."

Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than
ever as he expressed them.

"But what," said she, after a pause, "can have been his motive? What can
have induced him to behave so cruelly?"

"A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father's uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort
of preference which was often given me."

"I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked
him. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be
despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as
this."

After a few minutes' reflection, however, she continued, "I _do_
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of
his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition
must be dreadful."

"I will not trust myself on the subject," replied Wickham; "I can hardly
be just to him."

Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, "To
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his
father!" She could have added, "A young man, too, like _you_, whose very
countenance may vouch for your being amiable"--but she contented herself
with, "and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood,
connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!"

"We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips,
appears to do so much credit to--but he gave up everything to be of
use to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of the
Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most
intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to
be under the greatest obligations to my father's active superintendence,
and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him a
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to
be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_, as of his affection to myself."

"How strange!" cried Elizabeth. "How abominable! I wonder that the very
pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no better
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest--for
dishonesty I must call it."

"It _is_ wonderful," replied Wickham, "for almost all his actions may
be traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It has
connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are
none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger
impulses even than pride."

"Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?"

"Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his money
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the
poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride--for he is very proud of what
his father was--have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family,
to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and
careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up
as the most attentive and best of brothers."

"What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?"

He shook his head. "I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to
speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother--very, very
proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond
of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is
nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,
and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death, her
home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her
education."

After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying:

"I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley,
who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you
know Mr. Bingley?"

"Not at all."

"He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.
Darcy is."

"Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not
want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth
his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is
a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His
pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable--allowing something
for fortune and figure."

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual inquiries as to his success were
made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every
point; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,
he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least
importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged
that she would not make herself uneasy.

"I know very well, madam," said he, "that when persons sit down to a
card-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There
are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters."

Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation
was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.

"Lady Catherine de Bourgh," she replied, "has very lately given him
a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her
notice, but he certainly has not known her long."

"You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy."

"No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's
connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before
yesterday."

"Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates."

This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss
Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already
self-destined for another.

"Mr. Collins," said she, "speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
daughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship,
I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his
patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman."

"I believe her to be both in a great degree," replied Wickham; "I have
not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her
nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an
understanding of the first class."

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and
they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper
put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
Wickham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise
of Mrs. Phillips's supper party, but his manners recommended him to
everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done
gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name
as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.



Chapter 17


Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; she
knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,
and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
otherwise explained.

"They have both," said she, "been deceived, I dare say, in some way
or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side."

"Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody."

"Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in such
a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is
impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his
character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in him? Oh! no."

"I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being imposed on, than
that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me
last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it
be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his
looks."

"It is difficult indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what to
think."

"I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think."

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point--that Mr. Bingley,
if he _had_ been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair
became public.

The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had
been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal
invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed
for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their
dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly
asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To
the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet
as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to
the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an
activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if
eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities.

The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered
by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's look
and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she
had no disinclination for it.

"While I can have my mornings to myself," said she, "it is enough--I
think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those
who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody."

Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if
he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke
either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
dance.

"I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you," said he, "that a ball
of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people,
can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,
a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for her."

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being
engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins
instead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help
for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own were perforce
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as
good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first
struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy
of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing
civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
was extremely agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and
till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this
time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there
was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton
once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after--the very
shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have
found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the
improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than
a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.



Chapter 18


Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty
of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that
might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than
might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose
the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy's
pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though
this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was
pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who
told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the
day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,
"I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if
he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here."

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by
Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham's absence than if her first surmise had been just, every
feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in
speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her
spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had
not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition
to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular
notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress;
they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,
apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being
aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable
partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from
him was ecstasy.

She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances
were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who took
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that,
without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of
mind; Charlotte tried to console her:

"I dare say you will find him very agreeable."

"Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find
a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an
evil."

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a
simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant
in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and
reading in her neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholding
it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at
first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would
be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made
some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again
silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time
with:--"It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talked
about the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the size
of the room, or the number of couples."

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be
said.

"Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may
observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But
_now_ we may be silent."

"Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?"

"Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible."

"Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
imagine that you are gratifying mine?"

"Both," replied Elizabeth archly; "for I have always seen a great
similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the eclat of a proverb."

"This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,"
said he. "How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_
think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly."

"I must not decide on my own performance."

He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, "When you met us there the other day, we had just
been forming a new acquaintance."

The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his
features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a
constrained manner said, "Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners
as may ensure his _making_ friends--whether he may be equally capable of
_retaining_ them, is less certain."

"He has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship," replied Elizabeth
with emphasis, "and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all
his life."

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At
that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.
Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on
his dancing and his partner.

"I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very
superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the
first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at
her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then
flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let me not interrupt you, sir. You
will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that
young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me."

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir
William's allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his
eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and
Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,
he turned to his partner, and said, "Sir William's interruption has made
me forget what we were talking of."

"I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have
interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.
We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we
are to talk of next I cannot imagine."

"What think you of books?" said he, smiling.

"Books--oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
feelings."

"I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions."

"No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of
something else."

"The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?" said he,
with a look of doubt.

"Yes, always," she replied, without knowing what she said, for her
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
by her suddenly exclaiming, "I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was
unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being
created_."

"I am," said he, with a firm voice.

"And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?"

"I hope not."

"It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
to be secure of judging properly at first."

"May I ask to what these questions tend?"

"Merely to the illustration of _your_ character," said she, endeavouring
to shake off her gravity. "I am trying to make it out."

"And what is your success?"

She shook her head. "I do not get on at all. I hear such different
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly."

"I can readily believe," answered he gravely, "that reports may vary
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either."

"But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
opportunity."

"I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours," he coldly replied.
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree,
for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards
her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against
another.

They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and
with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:

"So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham!
Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand
questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among
his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late
Mr. Darcy's steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to
give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy's
using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has
always been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated
Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but
I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he
cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother
thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to
the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself
out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent
thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you,
Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt; but really,
considering his descent, one could not expect much better."

"His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same," said
Elizabeth angrily; "for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse
than of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of _that_, I can
assure you, he informed me himself."

"I beg your pardon," replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.
"Excuse my interference--it was kindly meant."

"Insolent girl!" said Elizabeth to herself. "You are much mistaken
if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
Darcy." She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.
Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for
Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way
before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for happiness.

"I want to know," said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her
sister's, "what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case
you may be sure of my pardon."

"No," replied Jane, "I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing
satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of
his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has
received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister's,
Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has
been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's regard."

"Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?"

"No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton."

"This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am
satisfied. But what does he say of the living?"

"He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
him _conditionally_ only."

"I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's sincerity," said Elizabeth warmly;
"but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.
Bingley's defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of
both gentlemen as I did before."

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr.
Bingley's regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence
in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,
and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as
to make a most important discovery.

"I have found out," said he, "by a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady
Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have
thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made
in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to
do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology."

"You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!"

"Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.
I believe him to be Lady Catherine's _nephew_. It will be in my power to
assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se'nnight."

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him
that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction
as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that
it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her
with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she
ceased speaking, replied thus:

"My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in
your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your
understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide
difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity,
and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that
I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with
the highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of
behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to
follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to
perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to
profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant
guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by
education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young
lady like yourself." And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr.
Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose
astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced
his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of
it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the
words "apology," "Hunsford," and "Lady Catherine de Bourgh." It vexed
her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him
with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time
to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however,
was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.

"I have no reason, I assure you," said he, "to be dissatisfied with my
reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be
certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him."

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the
train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to,
made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in
that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection
could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of
endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts
she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to
venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to
supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find
that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,
openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon
be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet
seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the
match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but
three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and
then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of
Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger
daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of
other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be
able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that
she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was
necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on
such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.
Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's
words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible
whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.

"What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am
sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say
nothing _he_ may not like to hear."

"For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you
to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by
so doing!"

Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and
blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was
convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
steady gravity.

At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and
chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of
tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and
she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent
entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,
but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of
exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth's
eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her
progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very
ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks
of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to
favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.
Mary's powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was
weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at
Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to
Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs
of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,
and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, "That will do
extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other
young ladies have time to exhibit."

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father's speech, was afraid
her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.

"If I," said Mr. Collins, "were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,
to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time
to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The
rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make
such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody,
especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit
him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an
occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the
family." And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had
been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--many
smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his
wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly,
and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably
clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he
must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough,
and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the
gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though
he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.
He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it;
that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to
her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her
the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed
her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and
good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself.

She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice;
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in
it.

The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by
a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of
an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the
long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said
nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of "Lord,
how tired I am!" accompanied by a violent yawn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and
addressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he
would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without
the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure,
and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on
her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next
day for a short time.

Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four
months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.



Chapter 19


The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his
declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at
the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On
finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,
soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:

"May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
course of this morning?"

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
Bennet answered instantly, "Oh dear!--yes--certainly. I am sure Lizzy
will be very happy--I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I
want you up stairs." And, gathering her work together, she was hastening
away, when Elizabeth called out:

"Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse
me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am
going away myself."

"No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are." And upon
Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to
escape, she added: "Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing Mr.
Collins."

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment's
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to
conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between
distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as
they were gone, Mr. Collins began.

"Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected
mother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the
purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as
soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of
my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
of selecting a wife, as I certainly did."

The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away
with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could
not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further,
and he continued:

"My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it will
add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I ought
to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
left Hunsford--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
arranging Miss de Bourgh's footstool, that she said, 'Mr. Collins, you
must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose
a gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let her be an active,
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice
and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond
anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and
respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not
be for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and
I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
in the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married."

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.

"You are too hasty, sir," she cried. "You forget that I have made no
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to
decline them."

"I am not now to learn," replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, "that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a
third time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just
said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long."

"Upon my word, sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is a rather
extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation."

"Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," said Mr. Collins
very gravely--"but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all
disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of
seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your
modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification."

"Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You
must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment
of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may
be considered, therefore, as finally settled." And rising as she
thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus
addressed her:

"When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on
the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
female character."

"Really, Mr. Collins," cried Elizabeth with some warmth, "you puzzle me
exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
to convince you of its being one."

"You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons for
believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is
unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would
be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections
with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are
circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further
consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no
means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Your
portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must
therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me,
I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females."

"I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect
forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant
female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking
the truth from her heart."

"You are uniformly charming!" cried he, with an air of awkward
gallantry; "and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable."

To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make
no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if
he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.



Chapter 20


Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open
the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.

This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have been
glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,
and could not help saying so.

"But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she added, "that Lizzy shall be
brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very
headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will
_make_ her know it."

"Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but if
she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not
to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity."

"Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy is
only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as
good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure."

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
husband, called out as she entered the library, "Oh! Mr. Bennet, you
are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make
Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if you
do not make haste he will change his mind and not have _her_."

Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by
her communication.

"I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she had
finished her speech. "Of what are you talking?"

"Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy."

"And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business."

"Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her
marrying him."

"Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion."

Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
library.

"Come here, child," cried her father as she appeared. "I have sent for
you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
you an offer of marriage. Is it true?" Elizabeth replied that it was.
"Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?"

"I have, sir."

"Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?"

"Yes, or I will never see her again."

"An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must
be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
if you _do_."

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning,
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.

"What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to
_insist_ upon her marrying him."

"My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request.
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be."

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane
in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and
sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner
varied, however, her determination never did.

Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his cousin
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.

While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
her, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him."

Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her
family. "Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," she added in a melancholy tone,
"for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used,
nobody feels for my poor nerves."

Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.

"Aye, there she comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned
as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided
she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy--if you take it
into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
to maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keep
you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking
to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking
to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have
no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it
is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied."

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that
any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the
irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of
them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with
an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to
the girls, "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold
your tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversation
together."

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projected
conversation: "Oh! Mr. Collins!"

"My dear madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point.
Far be it from me," he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation
to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a
young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment;
and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt
of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand;
for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as
when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our
estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect
to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to
your daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my
behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my
dismission from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all
liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise."



Chapter 21


The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of her
mother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly
expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her,
but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke
to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to her friend.

The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or ill
health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on
Saturday, and to Saturday he meant to stay.

After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their
aunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was
well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.

"I found," said he, "as the time drew near that I had better not meet
Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
might arise unpleasant to more than myself."

She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to
her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the
compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.

Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little,
hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair, flowing hand; and
Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as she read it, and saw
her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected
herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usual
cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety
on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no
sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane
invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room,
Jane, taking out the letter, said:

"This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good
deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on
their way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. You
shall hear what she says."

She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a
house. The next was in these words: "I do not pretend to regret anything
I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend;
but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that
delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may
lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved
correspondence. I depend on you for that." To these highflown
expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust;
and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw
nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to
regard it, in the enjoyment of his.

"It is unlucky," said she, after a short pause, "that you should not be
able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater
satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by
them."

"Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:"

"When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are
already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my
dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd--but of
that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may
abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your
beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the
three of whom we shall deprive you."

"It is evident by this," added Jane, "that he comes back no more this
winter."

"It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he _should_."

"Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own
master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which
particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_."

"Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth,
_we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think
Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments;
and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into
something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of
her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before
mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing;
her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister's
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to
favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
of so many?"

"What do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?" said Jane as she
finished it. "Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that
Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is
perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she
suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to
put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?"

"Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?"

"Most willingly."

"You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him
to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
does not care about you."

Jane shook her head.

"Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you
together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She
is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.
Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the
case is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion
that when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less trouble
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and
I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,
my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on
Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead
of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend."

"If we thought alike of Miss Bingley," replied Jane, "your
representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the
foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving
herself."

"That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means.
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer."

"But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
elsewhere?"

"You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth; "and if, upon mature
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by
all means to refuse him."

"How can you talk so?" said Jane, faintly smiling. "You must know that
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
not hesitate."

"I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider
your situation with much compassion."

"But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
required. A thousand things may arise in six months!"

The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline's
interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
so totally independent of everyone.

She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt
on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.

They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct;
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr.
Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the
conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had
been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two
full courses.



Chapter 22


The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the
chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.
Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. "It keeps him in good
humour," said she, "and I am more obliged to you than I can express."
Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was
very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
had any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her
from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards
herself. Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
secure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very
soon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
character, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.
His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.

In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow,
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
they entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must
guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure
and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
establishment were gained.

Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more
interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer
Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided
opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the
Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife
should make their appearance at St. James's. The whole family, in short,
were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes
of _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have
done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte's
dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had
gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were
in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible
nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must
be imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highly
either of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it was
the only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune,
and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest
preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at
the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all
the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business
was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship
she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder,
and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be
shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved
to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins,
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct
questions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
publish his prosperous love.

As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the
family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved
for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality,
said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, whenever
his engagements might allow him to visit them.

"My dear madam," he replied, "this invitation is particularly
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and
you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
possible."

They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
so speedy a return, immediately said:

"But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my
good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
offending your patroness."

"My dear sir," replied Mr. Collins, "I am particularly obliged to you
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
material a step without her ladyship's concurrence."

"You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence."

"Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive
from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your
regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though
my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now
take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my
cousin Elizabeth."

With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
surprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to
understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her
younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there was
a solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by no
means so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read
and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of this
kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.

The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying himself in love with her
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but
that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from
possibility as she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment was
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
she could not help crying out:

"Engaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte--impossible!"

The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained
her composure, and calmly replied:

"Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible
that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion,
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?"

But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort
for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of
their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her
all imaginable happiness.

"I see what you are feeling," replied Charlotte. "You must be surprised,
very much surprised--so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry
you. But when you have had time to think it over, I hope you will be
satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I never
was. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins's
character, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on
entering the marriage state."

Elizabeth quietly answered "Undoubtedly;" and after an awkward pause,
they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much
longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.
It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins's making two offers
of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony was
not exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possible
that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was a
most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herself
and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it
was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had
chosen.



Chapter 23


Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention
it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to
announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter--to an audience not merely wondering, but
incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness,
protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and
often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:

"Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?"

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
without anger such treatment; but Sir William's good breeding carried
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
most forbearing courtesy.

Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be
happy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she
herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out her
resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without
scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she
could at all forgive their daughter.

Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
more foolish than his daughter!

Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she said
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty
and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
to spread at Meryton.

Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort
on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
enough to drive happiness away.

Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that
no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious,
as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of his
return.

Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to
their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging
his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many
rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection
of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was
merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready
to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither
he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,
he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take
place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable
argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him
the happiest of men.

Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and
they gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continued
absence.

Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
falsehood.

Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as
she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so
dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
frequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, for
the strength of his attachment.

As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more
painful than Elizabeth's, but whatever she felt she was desirous of
concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother,
an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he
did not come back she would think herself very ill used. It needed
all Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
tranquillity.

Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his
first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;
and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.

Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,
and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight
of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she
regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. She
complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

"Indeed, Mr. Bennet," said she, "it is very hard to think that Charlotte
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to
make way for _her_, and live to see her take her place in it!"

"My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor."

This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of
making any answer, she went on as before.

"I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was
not for the entail, I should not mind it."

"What should not you mind?"

"I should not mind anything at all."

"Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
insensibility."

"I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own
daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!
Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?"

"I leave it to yourself to determine," said Mr. Bennet.



Chapter 24


Miss Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having had
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
the country.

Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest
of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the
writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupied
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former
letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being an
inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
the latter with regard to new furniture.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern
for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline's
assertion of her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happiness
to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however,
been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in
whatever manner he thought best, but her sister's was involved in it, as
she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short,
on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She
could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley's regard had really
died away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether
he had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped his
observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be
materially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remained
the same, her peace equally wounded.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
not help saying:

"Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But
I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall
all be as we were before."

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said
nothing.

"You doubt me," cried Jane, slightly colouring; "indeed, you have
no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,
and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not _that_ pain. A
little time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better."

With a stronger voice she soon added, "I have this comfort immediately,
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
has done no harm to anyone but myself."

"My dear Jane!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "you are too good. Your sweetness
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say
to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you
deserve."

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
the praise on her sister's warm affection.

"Nay," said Elizabeth, "this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want
to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not
be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your
privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see
of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or
sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the
other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is
unaccountable!"

"My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will
ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference
of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and
Charlotte's steady, prudent character. Remember that she is one of a
large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be
ready to believe, for everybody's sake, that she may feel something like
regard and esteem for our cousin."

"To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that
Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her
understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married him
cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though
it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of
danger security for happiness."

"I must think your language too strong in speaking of both," replied
Jane; "and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happy
together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You
mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy
ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but
our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than
it does."

"And men take care that they should."

"If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine."

"I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design,"
said Elizabeth; "but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business."

"And do you impute it to either of those?"

"Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what
I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can."

"You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?"

"Yes, in conjunction with his friend."

"I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman can
secure it."

"Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his
happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
connections, and pride."

"Beyond a doubt, they _do_ wish him to choose Miss Darcy," replied Jane;
"but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother's. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not try
to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an
affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
mistaken--or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of what
I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in
the best light, in the light in which it may be understood."

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no
more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with
less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she
did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the
effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her
no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's best
comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.

Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. "So, Lizzy," said he one day,
"your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to
being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then.
It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction
among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to
be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough in
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham
be _your_ man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably."

"Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not
all expect Jane's good fortune."

"True," said Mr. Bennet, "but it is a comfort to think that whatever of
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make
the most of it."

Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already
heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was
pleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they
had known anything of the matter.

Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be
any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society
of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody else
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.



Chapter 25


After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity,
Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his
side, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reason
to hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day would
be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his
relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair
cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another
letter of thanks.

On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving
her brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas
at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived
by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so
well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger
than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the
two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.
They had frequently been staying with her in town.

The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her arrival was to
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They
had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her
girls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there was
nothing in it.

"I do not blame Jane," she continued, "for Jane would have got Mr.
Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think
that she might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had it not
been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,
and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is just
as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed,
sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of
long sleeves."

Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before,
in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
conversation.

When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. "It
seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane," said she. "I am
sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such
as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl
for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets
her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent."

"An excellent consolation in its way," said Elizabeth, "but it will not
do for _us_. We do not suffer by _accident_. It does not often
happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in
love with only a few days before."

"But that expression of 'violently in love' is so hackneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as
often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour's acquaintance,
as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_ Mr. Bingley's
love?"

"I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and I
spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be
finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?"

"Oh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor
Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get
over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she
would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be
of service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as
anything."

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
of her sister's ready acquiescence.

"I hope," added Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard to
this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all,
unless he really comes to see her."

"And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such
a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may
perhaps have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
would hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse him from its
impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
never stirs without him."

"So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane
correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling."

"She will drop the acquaintance entirely."

But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's being
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's
attractions.

Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she
hoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with her brother,
she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of
seeing him.

The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
made part of it--of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's
warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,
from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and
she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
an attachment.

To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,
before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very
part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many
acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy's father, it was yet in his power to give her fresher
intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of
procuring.

Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject
of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute
description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of
praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both
him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's
treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman's
reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and
was confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam
Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.



Chapter 26


Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given
on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after
honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:

"You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because
you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve
yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want
of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against
_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you
must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father."

"My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed."

"Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise."

"Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I
can prevent it."

"Elizabeth, you are not serious now."

"I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love with
Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence
of it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father's opinion of me does
me the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see every day that where there is affection, young people
are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it
would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not
to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first
object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short,
I will do my best."

"Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very
often. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him."

"As I did the other day," said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: "very
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imagine
that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas as to the
necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope
you are satisfied."

Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for
the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point, without being resented.

Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted
by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,
his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was
now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think
it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that
she "_wished_ they might be happy." Thursday was to be the wedding day,
and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she
rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and
reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her
out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:

"I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza."

"_That_ you certainly shall."

"And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?"

"We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire."

"I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to
come to Hunsford."

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the
visit.

"My father and Maria are coming to me in March," added Charlotte, "and I
hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as
welcome as either of them."

The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, on
the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that
it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,
and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be
curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
for her own visit there to know the rest.

Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.

Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience
generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or
hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been
lost.

"My aunt," she continued, "is going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street."

She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.
"I did not think Caroline in spirits," were her words, "but she was very
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming
to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached
her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall
see them soon here."

Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that
accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister's being in town.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be
blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. After waiting at home every morning
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,
the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no
longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will
prove what she felt.

"My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her
better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been
entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear sister,
though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I
still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was
as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for
wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to
happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not
return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I
receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that
she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not
calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was
in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was
perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity,
though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out
as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on
her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting
wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the
cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though _we_ know
this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily
account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to
his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and
amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now,
because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago.
He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said
herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she
wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I
cannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should
be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity
in all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought,
and think only of what will make me happy--your affection, and the
invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very
soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield
again, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had better
not mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts
from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and
Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.--Yours, etc."

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not
even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on
every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.
Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him abundantly
regret what he had thrown away.

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth
had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to
herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,
he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than
in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to
suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
sincerely wish him happy.

All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the
circumstances, she thus went on: "I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that
I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pure
and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and
wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial
towards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to
think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love
with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take
his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the
ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain."



Chapter 27


With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take
Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan
and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure
as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing
Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There
was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her
a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,
and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She was
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement
of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became
perfect as plan could be.

The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.

The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of
what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to
him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that,
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
and pleasing.

Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her
think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a
good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say
that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much
delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
she had known Sir William's too long. He could tell her nothing new of
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
worn out, like his information.

It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when
they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen
her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her
spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however,
to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
acquaintance.

Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and
complimented her on bearing it so well.

"But my dear Elizabeth," she added, "what sort of girl is Miss King? I
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary."

"Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get
a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
mercenary."

"If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think."

"She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her."

"But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's death
made her mistress of this fortune."

"No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
poor?"

"But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her
so soon after this event."

"A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,
why should _we_?"

"_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her being
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling."

"Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. _He_ shall be
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish."

"No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire."

"Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrow
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones
worth knowing, after all."

"Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment."

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.

"We have not determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs. Gardiner,
"but, perhaps, to the Lakes."

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. "Oh, my dear,
dear aunt," she rapturously cried, "what delight! what felicity! You
give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What
are young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport
we shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other
travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We
_will_ know where we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen.
Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our
imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene,
will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let _our_
first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of
travellers."



Chapter 28


Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had
seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.

When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.

At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the
road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge,
everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of
the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing
at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the
liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with
coming when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw
instantly that her cousin's manners were not altered by his marriage;
his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they
were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife's
offers of refreshment.

Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help
in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its
aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her,
as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But
though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to
gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at
her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion.
When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be
ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her
eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but
in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to
admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to
the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had
happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
which he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his most
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which
the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the
prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered
the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome
modern building, well situated on rising ground.

From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband's
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything
was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by
Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often
forgotten.

She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining
in, observed:

"Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice
when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she
will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she
honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is
charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed
to walk home. Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I
_should_ say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several."

"Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed," added
Charlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour."

"Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference."

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,
and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed,
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it
was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit
would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.

About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running
up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened
the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with
agitation, cried out--

"Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make
haste, and come down this moment."

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more,
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in
quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the
garden gate.

"And is this all?" cried Elizabeth. "I expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
daughter."

"La! my dear," said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, "it is not
Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them;
the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
creature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?"

"She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
Why does she not come in?"

"Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours
when Miss de Bourgh comes in."

"I like her appearance," said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. "She
looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will
make him a very proper wife."

Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness
before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that
way.

At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day.



Chapter 29


Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity
of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady
Catherine's condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.

"I confess," said he, "that I should not have been at all surprised by
her ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at
Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it
would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who
could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there
(an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
after your arrival!"

"I am the less surprised at what has happened," replied Sir William,
"from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon."

Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.

When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth--

"Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which
becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion
for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you
for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank
preserved."

While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of
her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas
who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done
to his presentation at St. James's.

As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a
mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.

When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every
moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.
Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought
she could witness without trepidation.

From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, they
followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady
Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship,
with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had
settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should
be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those
apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.

In spite of having been at St. James's Sir William was so completely
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked
features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by
silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone,
as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to
Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.

When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment at her
being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any
likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
her eyes.

After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to
admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer.

The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and
all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had
likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her
ladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish
nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted
alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Sir
William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law
said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.
But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and
gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved
a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth
was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated
between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
dinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little
Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing
she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the
gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.

When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to
be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any
intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every
subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to
have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte's domestic
concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
beneath this great lady's attention, which could furnish her with an
occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse
with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel,
pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times, how many sisters
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been
her mother's maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of
her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then
observed,

"Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For your
sake," turning to Charlotte, "I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. Do you play and sing, Miss
Bennet?"

"A little."

"Oh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to----You shall try it
some day. Do your sisters play and sing?"

"One of them does."

"Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do
you draw?"

"No, not at all."

"What, none of you?"

"Not one."

"That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters."

"My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London."

"Has your governess left you?"

"We never had any governess."

"No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home
without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must
have been quite a slave to your education."

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not been
the case.

"Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, you
must have been neglected."

"Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as
wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be
idle, certainly might."

"Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage
one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person,
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalf's
calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. 'Lady
Catherine,' said she, 'you have given me a treasure.' Are any of your
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?"

"Yes, ma'am, all."

"All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The
younger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sisters
must be very young?"

"Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be
much in company. But really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth
as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind."

"Upon my word," said her ladyship, "you give your opinion very decidedly
for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?"

"With three younger sisters grown up," replied Elizabeth, smiling, "your
ladyship can hardly expect me to own it."

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.

"You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need not
conceal your age."

"I am not one-and-twenty."

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her
party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson
expressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins
was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking her
for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many.
Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes
and noble names.

When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by
the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins's side and as many bows on Sir William's they departed. As soon
as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin
to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for
Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her
commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy
Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise
into his own hands.



Chapter 30


Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was long
enough to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled,
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not
often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his
morning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; but
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in
reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room,
which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent
reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and
had a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
prevailed upon to get out.

Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family.

Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in
commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistrate
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her
by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to
be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.

The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins's reach. This,
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she had
often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she
frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.

In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy was
expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not
many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him
were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently
destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
Miss Lucas and herself.

His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his
bow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the great
intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his
respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for
Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of
his uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when
Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen
them from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running
into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:

"I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would
never have come so soon to wait upon me."

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been
used to look in Hertfordshire--paid his compliments, with his usual
reserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward her
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely
curtseyed to him without saying a word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of
Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual
way, and after a moment's pause, added:

"My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never
happened to see her there?"

She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between
the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he
answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The
subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
away.



Chapter 31


Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures
of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither--for while there were visitors in the
house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little
of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the
Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seen
only at church.

The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. Her ladyship received
them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room.

Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had
moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself,
as well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
scruple to call out:

"What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking
of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is."

"We are speaking of music, madam," said he, when no longer able to avoid
a reply.

"Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I
must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment
of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt,
I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health
had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed
delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?"

Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.

"I am very glad to hear such a good account of her," said Lady
Catherine; "and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel
if she does not practice a good deal."

"I assure you, madam," he replied, "that she does not need such advice.
She practises very constantly."

"So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often
tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she
will never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs.
Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.
Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part
of the house."

Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and made
no answer.

When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away
from her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:

"You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
me? I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play so well. There
is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the
will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate
me."

"I shall not say you are mistaken," he replied, "because you could not
really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have
had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find
great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are
not your own."

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
Colonel Fitzwilliam, "Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a part
of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of
credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all
that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave to
say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such
things may come out as will shock your relations to hear."

"I am not afraid of you," said he, smilingly.

"Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of," cried Colonel
Fitzwilliam. "I should like to know how he behaves among strangers."

"You shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.
The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know,
was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced
only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain
knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a
partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact."

"I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
beyond my own party."

"True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders."

"Perhaps," said Darcy, "I should have judged better, had I sought an
introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers."

"Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" said Elizabeth, still
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. "Shall we ask him why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend
himself to strangers?"

"I can answer your question," said Fitzwilliam, "without applying to
him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble."

"I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," said Darcy,
"of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
concerns, as I often see done."

"My fingers," said Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I will not take the
trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as
capable as any other woman's of superior execution."

Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right. You have employed your
time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers."

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy:

"Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and
could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion
of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have
been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn."

Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his
cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have
been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.

Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the
gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage was
ready to take them all home.



Chapter 32


Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to
be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her
half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and
Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.

He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his
intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were
to be within.

They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely
necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and
feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
departure, she observed:

"How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!
It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?"

"Perfectly so, I thank you."

She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short
pause added:

"I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever
returning to Netherfield again?"

"I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend
very little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and
is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
increasing."

"If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for
the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the same
principle."

"I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if he were to give it up as
soon as any eligible purchase offers."

Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
trouble of finding a subject to him.

He took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortable
house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
Collins first came to Hunsford."

"I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
kindness on a more grateful object."

"Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife."

"Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one
of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the
wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a
prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her."

"It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a
distance of her own family and friends."

"An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles."

"And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day's
journey. Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance."

"I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match," cried Elizabeth. "I should never have said Mrs. Collins
was settled _near_ her family."

"It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far."

As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered:

"I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the
case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_
the present distance."

Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, "_You_ cannot
have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have
been always at Longbourn."

Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:

"Are you pleased with Kent?"

A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister, just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprised
them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding
on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying
much to anybody, went away.

"What can be the meaning of this?" said Charlotte, as soon as he was
gone. "My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never
have called us in this familiar way."

But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,
even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot
always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of her
former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw
there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners,
she believed he might have the best informed mind.

But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak,
it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice
to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really
animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel
Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was
generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effect
of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
seriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
seemed nothing but absence of mind.

She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike would
vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.


In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying
Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.



Chapter 33


More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to
prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that
it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,
therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third
rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about
her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking of
Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to
expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying
_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must
mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed
her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
pales opposite the Parsonage.

She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane's last letter,
and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in
spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw
on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the
letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said:

"I did not know before that you ever walked this way."

"I have been making the tour of the park," he replied, "as I generally
do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are
you going much farther?"

"No, I should have turned in a moment."

And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together.

"Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?" said she.

"Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He
arranges the business just as he pleases."

"And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least
pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy."

"He likes to have his own way very well," replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.
"But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it
than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
dependence."

"In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of
either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?"

"These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater
weight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where
they like."

"Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
do."

"Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many
in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to
money."

"Is this," thought Elizabeth, "meant for me?" and she coloured at the
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, "And pray, what
is the usual price of an earl's younger son? Unless the elder brother is
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds."

He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt
a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,
she soon afterwards said:

"I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of
having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a
lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well
for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
likes with her."

"No," said Colonel Fitzwilliam, "that is an advantage which he must
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy."

"Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your
charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a
little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
may like to have her own way."

As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner
in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth. She directly replied:

"You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them."

"I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man--he
is a great friend of Darcy's."

"Oh! yes," said Elizabeth drily; "Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him."

"Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in
those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in
our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to
him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that
Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture."

"What is it you mean?"

"It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known,
because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it would be an
unpleasant thing."

"You may depend upon my not mentioning it."

"And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing
him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer."

"Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?"

"I understood that there were some very strong objections against the
lady."

"And what arts did he use to separate them?"

"He did not talk to me of his own arts," said Fitzwilliam, smiling. "He
only told me what I have now told you."

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she
was so thoughtful.

"I am thinking of what you have been telling me," said she. "Your
cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?"

"You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?"

"I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his
friend's inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to
determine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy.
But," she continued, recollecting herself, "as we know none of the
particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed
that there was much affection in the case."

"That is not an unnatural surmise," said Fitzwilliam, "but it is a
lessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly."

This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a picture
of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent
matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption
of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other
people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have
such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures
taken to separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she had
always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement
of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ was
the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had
suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while
every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the
world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.

"There were some very strong objections against the lady," were Colonel
Fitzwilliam's words; and those strong objections probably were, her
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
business in London.

"To Jane herself," she exclaimed, "there could be no possibility of
objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!--her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither
could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some
peculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and
respectability which he will probably never reach." When she thought of
her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow
that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose
pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of
importance in his friend's connections, than from their want of sense;
and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed
by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr.
Bingley for his sister.

The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to
her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as much
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's being rather
displeased by her staying at home.



Chapter 34


When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself
as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly
disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy's
shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her
a keener sense of her sister's sufferings. It was some consolation
to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the
next--and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should
herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of
her spirits, by all that affection could do.

She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering that
his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him.

While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the
room. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.
She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and
then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her
in an agitated manner, and thus began:

"In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be
repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
you."

Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement;
and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her,
immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides
those of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on the
subject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority--of
its being a degradation--of the family obstacles which had always
opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to
the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
suit.

In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to
the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions did
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to
receive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she
lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to
answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with
representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite
of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and with
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of
his hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt
of a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but
his countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could
only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her
cheeks, and she said:

"In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should
be felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to
anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be
of short duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented
the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in
overcoming it after this explanation."

Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed
on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance
of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed
himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth's feelings
dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:

"And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!
I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance."

"I might as well inquire," replied she, "why with so evident a desire
of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I have
other provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided against
you--had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you
think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has
been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most
beloved sister?"

As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she
continued:

"I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,
you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other--of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
kind."

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening
with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.

"Can you deny that you have done it?" she repeated.

With assumed tranquillity he then replied: "I have no wish of denying
that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been
kinder than towards myself."

Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.

"But it is not merely this affair," she continued, "on which my dislike
is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you was
decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to
say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?"

"You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns," said Darcy,
in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.

"Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an
interest in him?"

"His misfortunes!" repeated Darcy contemptuously; "yes, his misfortunes
have been great indeed."

"And of your infliction," cried Elizabeth with energy. "You have reduced
him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You have
withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for
him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence
which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this!
and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and
ridicule."

"And this," cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
"is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me!
I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps," added he, stopping in
his walk, and turning towards her, "these offenses might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of
my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and
just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose
condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?"

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to
the utmost to speak with composure when she said:

"You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern
which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more
gentlemanlike manner."

She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued:

"You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that
would have tempted me to accept it."

Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on:

"From the very beginning--from the first moment, I may almost say--of
my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of
the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of
disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry."

"You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness."

And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house.

The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how
to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for
half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed,
was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of
marriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for
so many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of
all the objections which had made him prevent his friend's marrying
her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his
own case--was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired
unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable
pride--his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to
Jane--his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could
not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr.
Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon
overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for
a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the
sound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was to
encounter Charlotte's observation, and hurried her away to her room.



Chapter 35


Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the
surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything
else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after
breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one
of the gates into the ground.

After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which
edged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr.
Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now
near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced
her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though
in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the
gate. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter,
which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure,
"I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.
Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?" And then, with a
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written
quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:--

"Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension
of its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those
offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,
should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written
and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
demand it of your justice.

"Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was,
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley
from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young
persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could
bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope
to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions
and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which
is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which
may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity
must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.

"I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with
others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young
woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance
at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious
attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I
had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir
William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to
your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.
He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could
be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend's behaviour
attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss
Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also
watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever,
but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced
from the evening's scrutiny, that though she received his attentions
with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of
sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken here, _I_ must have been
in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter
probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict
pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not
scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and
air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction
that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be
easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is
certain--but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions
are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe
her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial
conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the
marriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to have
the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want of
connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. But
there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still
existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had
myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before
me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your
mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that
total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by
herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your
father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern
for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this
representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to
have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure,
is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than
it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say
farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties
was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led
me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy
connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as
you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.

"The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters' uneasiness
had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was
soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in
detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in
London. We accordingly went--and there I readily engaged in the office
of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I
described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance
might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose
that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been
seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your
sister's indifference. He had before believed her to return his
affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great
natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on his
own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was
no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into
Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the
work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There
is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not
reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the
measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister's being in
town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her
brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without
ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me
enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this
concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it
was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no
other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister's feelings, it
was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to
you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn
them.

"With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured
Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his
connection with my family. Of what he has _particularly_ accused me I
am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more
than one witness of undoubted veracity.

"Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many
years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good
conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to
be of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his
kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at
school, and afterwards at Cambridge--most important assistance, as his
own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have
been unable to give him a gentleman's education. My father was not only
fond of this young man's society, whose manners were always engaging; he
had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be
his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is
many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different
manner. The vicious propensities--the want of principle, which he was
careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape
the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself,
and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr.
Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree
you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham
has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from
unfolding his real character--it adds even another motive.

"My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to
Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly
recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner
that his profession might allow--and if he took orders, desired that a
valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There
was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long
survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr. Wickham
wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders,
he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more
immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he
could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying
law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would
be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed
him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to
his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the
business was therefore soon settled--he resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to
receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection
between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him
to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I believe he chiefly
lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free
from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation.
For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the
incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to
me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured
me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He
had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely
resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in
question--of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was
well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not
have forgotten my revered father's intentions. You will hardly blame
me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every
repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of
his circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me
to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every
appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But
last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.

"I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself,
and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold
to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your
secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to
the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.
About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed
for her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided
over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by
design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him
and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and
by her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana,
whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to
her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and
to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her
excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed
the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two
before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the
idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as
a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and
how I acted. Regard for my sister's credit and feelings prevented
any public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place
immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr.
Wickham's chief object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which
is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of
revenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have
been complete indeed.

"This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have
been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as
false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr.
Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he
had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered
at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either,
detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in
your inclination.

"You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but
I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to
be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more
particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our
near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of
the executors of my father's will, has been unavoidably acquainted
with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_
should make _my_ assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by
the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be
the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some
opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the
morning. I will only add, God bless you.

"FITZWILLIAM DARCY"



Chapter 36


If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation
to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what
had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly
left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the
next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of
the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's insensibility she
instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst
objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing
him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied
her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and
insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when
she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which,
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her
feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, "This must be false!
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!"--and when she had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
regard it, that she would never look in it again.

In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter
was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what
he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though
she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own
words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the
will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living
was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the
particulars immediately following of Wickham's resigning all pretensions
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read
on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
render Mr. Darcy's conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.

The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at
Mr. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his
entrance into the ----shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself. As
to his real character, had information been in her power, she had
never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had
established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried
to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of
integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of
Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those
casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy
had described as the idleness and vice of many years' continuance. But
no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before
her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more
substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After
pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to
read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss
Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was
referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam
himself--from whom she had previously received the information of his
near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no
reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to
him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and
at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never
have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his
cousin's corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation
between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's.
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed;
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
always prevent his exposing the son.

How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned!
His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him
of irreligious or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
sister as to prove him capable of _some_ amiable feeling; that had his
actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man
as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced,
absurd.

"How despicably I have acted!" she cried; "I, who have prided myself
on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified
my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliating is this
discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could
not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been my
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were
concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself."

From herself to Jane--from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation
_there_ had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that
credit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to
give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her
sister's attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte's
opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his
description of Jane. She felt that Jane's feelings, though fervent, were
little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air
and manner not often united with great sensibility.

When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense
of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind
than on hers.

The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed,
but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus been
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered
that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
had ever known before.

After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
variety of thought--re-considering events, determining probabilities,
and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and
so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made
her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish
of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such
reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.

She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take
leave--but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern
in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
longer an object; she could think only of her letter.



Chapter 37


The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then
hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
having them all to dine with her.

Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as
her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her
ladyship's indignation would have been. "What would she have said? how
would she have behaved?" were questions with which she amused herself.

Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. "I assure
you, I feel it exceedingly," said Lady Catherine; "I believe no one
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to
me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The
dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His
attachment to Rosings certainly increases."

Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.

Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
spirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing that
she did not like to go home again so soon, she added:

"But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that
you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your
company, I am sure."

"I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation," replied
Elizabeth, "but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town
next Saturday."

"Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected
you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There
can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly
spare you for another fortnight."

"But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return."

"Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters
are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay
another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as
Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room
for one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I
should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large."

"You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
original plan."

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. "Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant
with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.
You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in
the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her
having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of
Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those
things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I
am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone."

"My uncle is to send a servant for us."

"Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you
have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses?
Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
attended to."

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey,
and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,
which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so
occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be
reserved for solitary hours; whenever she was alone, she gave way to it
as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary
walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant
recollections.

Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She
studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at
times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,
she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she
could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal,
or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there
forever.

Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's
explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved
to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!

When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.

Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent
there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her
hand to both.



Chapter 38


On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.

"I know not, Miss Elizabeth," said he, "whether Mrs. Collins has yet
expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We
know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending
your time unpleasantly."

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She
had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make _her_
feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling
solemnity replied:

"It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not
disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately
having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and,
from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the
humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford
visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to
Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage
and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You
see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge
that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should
not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are
sharers of our intimacy at Rosings."

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
and truth in a few short sentences.

"You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will
be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of
character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each
other."

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang.
Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she
had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that
her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her
home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their
dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her
with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her
in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.

"But," he added, "you will of course wish to have your humble respects
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
while you have been here."

Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off.

"Good gracious!" cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence, "it seems
but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have
happened!"

"A great many indeed," said her companion with a sigh.

"We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
How much I shall have to tell!"

Elizabeth added privately, "And how much I shall have to conceal!"

Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's
house, where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her
aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.

It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for
Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate;
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried
into repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister
further.



Chapter 39


It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage
was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs.
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
dressing a salad and cucumber.

After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
"Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?"

"And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia, "but you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there." Then, showing
her purchases--"Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think
it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
better."

And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
unconcern, "Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
are going in a fortnight."

"Are they indeed!" cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.

"They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme;
and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to
go too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
have!"

"Yes," thought Elizabeth, "_that_ would be a delightful scheme indeed,
and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!"

"Now I have got some news for you," said Lydia, as they sat down at
table. "What do you think? It is excellent news--capital news--and about
a certain person we all like!"

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need
not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:

"Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse
things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad
he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for
my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not?
There is no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary King. There's for you! She
is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe."

"And Mary King is safe!" added Elizabeth; "safe from a connection
imprudent as to fortune."

"She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him."

"But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side," said Jane.

"I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
three straws about her--who could about such a nasty little freckled
thing?"

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal!

As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
Lydia's purchases, were seated in it.

"How nicely we are all crammed in," cried Lydia. "I am glad I bought my
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any
flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.
She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to
get husbands, you can't think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!
how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would
chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a
lady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter."

With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did
Lydia, assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name.

Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
say voluntarily to Elizabeth:

"I am glad you are come back, Lizzy."

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that
occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare and
poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one
hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat
some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger
Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's,
was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who
would hear her.

"Oh! Mary," said she, "I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and pretended there
was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty
had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved
very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold
luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated
you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never
should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then
we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that
anybody might have heard us ten miles off!"

To this Mary very gravely replied, "Far be it from me, my dear sister,
to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the
generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for
_me_--I should infinitely prefer a book."

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to
anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.

In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk
to Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily
opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could
not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.
There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr.
Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The
comfort to _her_ of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond
expression. In a fortnight they were to go--and once gone, she hoped
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.

She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.



Chapter 40


Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could
no longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress every
particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be
surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene
between Mr. Darcy and herself.

Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was
sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the
unhappiness which her sister's refusal must have given him.

"His being so sure of succeeding was wrong," said she, "and certainly
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his
disappointment!"

"Indeed," replied Elizabeth, "I am heartily sorry for him; but he has
other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?"

"Blame you! Oh, no."

"But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?"

"No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did."

"But you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very next
day."

She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane!
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here
collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy's vindication, though
grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear the one without involving the other.

"This will not do," said Elizabeth; "you never will be able to make both
of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy's;
but you shall do as you choose."

It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.

"I do not know when I have been more shocked," said she. "Wickham so
very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only
consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the
knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thing
of his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it
so."

"Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so
full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am
growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion
makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will
be as light as a feather."

"Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his
countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!"

"There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
appearance of it."

"I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
used to do."

"And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike
to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one's genius, such an
opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually
abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughing
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty."

"Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
the matter as you do now."

"Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. And
with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and say
that I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I knew I
had! Oh! how I wanted you!"

"How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
undeserved."

"Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There
is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I
ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintances in general understand
Wickham's character."

Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, "Surely there can be no
occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your opinion?"

"That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorised me
to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular
relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his
conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy
is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in
Meryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal
to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to
anyone here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out,
and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At
present I will say nothing about it."

"You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for
ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to
re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate."

The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation. She had
got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight,
and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish
to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind,
of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other
half of Mr. Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she
had been valued by her friend. Here was knowledge in which no one
could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off
this last encumbrance of mystery. "And then," said she, "if that very
improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to
tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The
liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!"

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
state of her sister's spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a
very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself
in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment,
and, from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than most first
attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance,
and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her
attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the
indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own
health and their tranquillity.

"Well, Lizzy," said Mrs. Bennet one day, "what is your opinion _now_ of
this sad business of Jane's? For my part, I am determined never to speak
of it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. But
I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is
a very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there's the least
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of
his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of
everybody, too, who is likely to know."

"I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more."

"Oh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though I
shall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, I
would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane will
die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done."

But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation,
she made no answer.

"Well, Lizzy," continued her mother, soon afterwards, "and so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope
it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her
mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_
housekeeping, I dare say."

"No, nothing at all."

"A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes. _they_ will
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed
for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it as
quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens."

"It was a subject which they could not mention before me."

"No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt they
often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me."



Chapter 41


The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was
the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies
in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost
universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family.

"Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?" would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. "How can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?"

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what
she had herself endured on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty years
ago.

"I am sure," said she, "I cried for two days together when Colonel
Miller's regiment went away. I thought I should have broken my heart."

"I am sure I shall break _mine_," said Lydia.

"If one could but go to Brighton!" observed Mrs. Bennet.

"Oh, yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so
disagreeable."

"A little sea-bathing would set me up forever."

"And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,"
added Kitty.

Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's
objections; and never had she been so much disposed to pardon his
interference in the views of his friend.

But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for she
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of
the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a
very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humour
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months' acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.

The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster,
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister's feelings, Lydia
flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone's
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repined at her fate
in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

"I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,"
said she, "Though I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as much
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older."

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make
her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her
go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia's general
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said:

"Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some public
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so
little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present
circumstances."

"If you were aware," said Elizabeth, "of the very great disadvantage to
us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and
imprudent manner--nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you
would judge differently in the affair."

"Already arisen?" repeated Mr. Bennet. "What, has she frightened away
some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity
are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows who
have been kept aloof by Lydia's folly."

"Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not
of particular, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our
importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
Lydia's character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character
will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness
of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal
contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger
Kitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
disgrace?"

Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and
affectionately taking her hand said in reply:

"Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to
Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance
even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find
women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest
of her life."

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not
in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on
them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret
over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her
disposition.

Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
united volubility. In Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.
She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them
at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp--its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once.

Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such
realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have
been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.
Lydia's going to Brighton was all that consoled her for her melancholy
conviction of her husband's never intending to go there himself.

But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia's leaving
home.

Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted
her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure,
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,
and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.

On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at Meryton, he dined,
with other of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.

He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's
recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,
asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.
With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added:

"How long did you say he was at Rosings?"

"Nearly three weeks."

"And you saw him frequently?"

"Yes, almost every day."

"His manners are very different from his cousin's."

"Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves upon acquaintance."

"Indeed!" cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her. "And
pray, may I ask?--" But checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, "Is
it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility
to his ordinary style?--for I dare not hope," he continued in a lower
and more serious tone, "that he is improved in essentials."

"Oh, no!" said Elizabeth. "In essentials, I believe, he is very much
what he ever was."

While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while she added:

"When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
his mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, from
knowing him better, his disposition was better understood."

Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
look; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off his
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
accents:

"You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume
even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must only
deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only
fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been
alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good
opinion and judgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always
operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be
imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I
am certain he has very much at heart."

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a
slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his
side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual desire of never meeting again.

When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.
Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,
and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible--advice which
there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in
the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more
gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.



Chapter 42


Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic
comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,
esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views
of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of
a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
imprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.

Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used,
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure she found little
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties
abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and
sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all
her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a
watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had been
looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the
satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity--to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

"But it is fortunate," thought she, "that I have something to wish for.
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation."

When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going off to
the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still
less to be learnt--for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were
much too full of lines under the words to be made public.

After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good
humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything wore
a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came
back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet
was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of
June, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without
tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by
the following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to
mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious
arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered in
Meryton.

The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In that
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing
the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.

With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It was
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
owner. "But surely," said she, "I may enter his county with impunity,
and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me."

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away
before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their
cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the
next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
One enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness of companions;
a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
disappointments abroad.

It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. are
sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's
former residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintance
still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the
principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton,
Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not
in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed
an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

"My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard
so much?" said her aunt; "a place, too, with which so many of your
acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
know."

Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She
must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after going over so
many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.

Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. "If it were merely a fine house
richly furnished," said she, "I should not care about it myself; but
the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the
country."

Elizabeth said no more--but her mind could not acquiesce. The
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and
thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such
a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the
absence of the family were unfavourably answered.

Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name of its
proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question--and her
alarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike
to the scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.



Chapter 43


Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.

The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.

Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for
half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of
high woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance was
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of
meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at her being where she was.

The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much less
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They
followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which
they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance,
was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and
she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its
banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it,
with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking
different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be
seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to
the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of
his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of
splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.

"And of this place," thought she, "I might have been mistress! With
these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,"--recollecting
herself--"that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them."

This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something very like
regret.

She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really
absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question
was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs.
Reynolds replied that he was, adding, "But we expect him to-morrow, with
a large party of friends." How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own
journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!

Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the
likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures,
over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a young
gentleman, the son of her late master's steward, who had been brought
up by him at his own expense. "He is now gone into the army," she added;
"but I am afraid he has turned out very wild."

Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not
return it.

"And that," said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
"is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago."

"I have heard much of your master's fine person," said Mrs. Gardiner,
looking at the picture; "it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not."

Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
intimation of her knowing her master.

"Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?"

Elizabeth coloured, and said: "A little."

"And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma'am?"

"Yes, very handsome."

"I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you
will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late
master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then. He was very fond of them."

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being among them.

Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
when she was only eight years old.

"And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?" said Mrs. Gardiner.

"Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished!--She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is
a new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master; she
comes here to-morrow with him."

Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her
communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either
by pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister.

"Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?"

"Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months."

"Except," thought Elizabeth, "when she goes to Ramsgate."

"If your master would marry, you might see more of him."

"Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know who is
good enough for him."

Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, "It is
very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so."

"I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,"
replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she
listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, "I have
never known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever
since he was four years old."

This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her
ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.
Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was
grateful to her uncle for saying:

"There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in
having such a master."

"Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could
not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and
he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the
world."

Elizabeth almost stared at her. "Can this be Mr. Darcy?" thought she.

"His father was an excellent man," said Mrs. Gardiner.

"Yes, ma'am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just
as affable to the poor."

Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.
Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

"He is the best landlord, and the best master," said she, "that ever
lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but
themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give
him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw
anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away
like other young men."

"In what an amiable light does this place him!" thought Elizabeth.

"This fine account of him," whispered her aunt as they walked, "is not
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend."

"Perhaps we might be deceived."

"That is not very likely; our authority was too good."

On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty
sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when
last at Pemberley.

"He is certainly a good brother," said Elizabeth, as she walked towards
one of the windows.

Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy's delight, when she should enter
the room. "And this is always the way with him," she added. "Whatever
can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There
is nothing he would not do for her."

The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were
all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings;
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible.

In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of
the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested
her--and she beheld a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such a
smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he
looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest
contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery.
Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father's
lifetime.

There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more gentle
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of
their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
considered how many people's happiness were in his guardianship!--how
much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!--how much of
good or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought
forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she
stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his
eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of
gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and
softened its impropriety of expression.

When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.

As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former
was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.

They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes
instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest
blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
of perfect civility.

She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's expression of surprise, on
beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer
she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that
he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few
minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in
her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent
had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as
to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in
Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
distraction of his thoughts.

At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took
leave.

The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but
Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings,
followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her
coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the
world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light
might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely
thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he
thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes
sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination;
for it was plain that he was that moment arrived--that moment alighted
from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over
the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly
altered--what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was
amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family!
Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never
had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What
a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put
his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account
for it.

They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer
reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and
seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she
distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then
was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind--in
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,
she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice which was
not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in
seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with
composure.

At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind
aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.

They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of
the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the
valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading
many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish
of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.
With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.
It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which
brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods,
to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed
it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene;
it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the
valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream,
and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it.
Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the
bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only
of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the
man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment
was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here
less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before
they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared
for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the
turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw
that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his
politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place;
but she had not got beyond the words "delightful," and "charming," when
some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of
Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed,
and she said no more.

Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;
and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the
acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had
revolted in his offer to herself. "What will be his surprise," thought
she, "when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of
fashion."

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore
it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the
connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had
some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,
his taste, or his good manners.

The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he
chose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time
to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was
walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder.
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment
must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and
continually was she repeating, "Why is he so altered? From what can
it proceed? It cannot be for _me_--it cannot be for _my_ sake that his
manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a
change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me."

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to
the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated
in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred
her husband's. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
together. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished him
to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been
very unexpected--"for your housekeeper," she added, "informed us that
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected
in the country." He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that
business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. "They
will join me early to-morrow," he continued, "and among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you--Mr. Bingley and his sisters."

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name had been the last
mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, _his_
mind was not very differently engaged.

"There is also one other person in the party," he continued after a
pause, "who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance
during your stay at Lambton?"

The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great
for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her
must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made
him think really ill of her.

They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and
pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
mile behind.

He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but
there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected
that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale
with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her
patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was
over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go
into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and
they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him
walking slowly towards the house.

The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.
"He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming," said her uncle.

"There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure," replied her
aunt, "but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I
have seen nothing of it."

"I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling."

"To be sure, Lizzy," said her aunt, "he is not so handsome as Wickham;
or, rather, he has not Wickham's countenance, for his features
are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was so
disagreeable?"

Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked
him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never
seen him so pleasant as this morning.

"But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities," replied
her uncle. "Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off
his grounds."

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but
said nothing.

"From what we have seen of him," continued Mrs. Gardiner, "I really
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by
anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he
speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the
good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character!
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal
master, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends every
virtue."

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of
his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in
as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from
his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor
Wickham's so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.

Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think of
anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning's walk they
had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of a
intercourse renewed after many years' discontinuance.

The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and, above
all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.



Chapter 44


Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.
But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their
arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in
a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing
the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her
surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that
there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a
quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
Elizabeth's feelings was at every moment increasing. She was quite
amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet,
she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much
in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.

She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of
inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.

Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her
being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was
only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from
her beyond a monosyllable.

Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but there
was sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much
relieved by discerning such different feelings.

They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingley
was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick
step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All
Elizabeth's anger against him had been long done away; but had she still
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected
cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He
inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked
and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.

To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage
than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation towards
each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew
what it was to love. Of the lady's sensations they remained a little
in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
evident enough.

Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the
feelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her own, and
to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she
endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley
was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.

In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh!
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in
a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion
that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But,
though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his
behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No look
appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred
between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point
she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a
recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying
more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed
to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone
which had something of real regret, that it "was a very long time since
he had had the pleasure of seeing her;" and, before she could reply,
he added, "It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of
November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield."

Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which
gave them meaning.

It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself;
but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general
complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so removed
from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that
the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed however
temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When
she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion
of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a
disgrace--when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the
very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last
lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage--the difference, the change was
so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly
restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company
of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance
could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Rosings.

Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they arose
to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however,
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.

Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, and on
this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been
little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was
not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to
interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.

Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings and his servant's report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest,
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had
nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town
where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.

With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the
son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known
fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind
him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.

As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion;
and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She
certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in
his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,
there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked.
It was gratitude; gratitude, not merely for having once loved her,
but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and
acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations
accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid
her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most
eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display
of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only
were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent
on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much
pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude--for to love, ardent
love, it must be attributed; and as such its impression on her was of a
sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be
exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him,
she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how
far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would
be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her
fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal of
his addresses.

It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's in coming to see them on the
very day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she had reached it only to a
late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled,
by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that
it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following
morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.

Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.



Chapter 45


Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley's dislike of her had
originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how unwelcome her
appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how
much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now be renewed.

On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.

In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with
all the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear
of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior
the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece,
however, did her justice, and pitied her.

By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and,
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
of saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she
feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss
Bingley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.

The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many
a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole
party--for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches soon collected
them round the table.

While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to
regret that he came.

He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:

"Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire Militia removed from Meryton?
They must be a great loss to _your_ family."

In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's name; but Elizabeth
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
various recollections connected with him gave her a moment's distress;
but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would
have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in
Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected
with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy's
meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very
wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and without
meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern
for the welfare of his friend.

Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which
had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.

Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss
Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth's person,
behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother's
recommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could not
err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana
without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When
Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to
him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

"How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy," she
cried; "I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since
the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing
that we should not have known her again."

However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented
himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration than
her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.

"For my own part," she rejoined, "I must confess that I never could
see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose
wants character--there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes,
which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything
extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do
not like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable."

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and, from a
determination of making him speak, she continued:

"I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, '_She_
a beauty!--I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But afterwards she
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
one time."

"Yes," replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, "but _that_
was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I have
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance."

He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.

Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked
of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit--of everything but
himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of
him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece's
beginning the subject.



Chapter 46


Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but
on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.

They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and
her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had been
written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:

"Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be
assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our
surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am
very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step
(and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.
Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How
thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against
him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have
passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect
him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of
their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly
know what I have written."

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.

"By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I
wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,
and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham
and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone
to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the
day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia's short
letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna
Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W.
never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was
repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.
intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham,
but no further; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackney
coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that
is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road.
I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that
side London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing
them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but
without any success--no such people had been seen to pass through. With
the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions
to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved
for him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our
distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the
worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make
it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue
their first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design against a
young woman of Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can I suppose
her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that
Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his
head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to
be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she
exert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And
as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has
anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of
confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you
have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the
first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not
so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I
take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but
circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to
come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well,
that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something
more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel
Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sure
I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any
measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to
be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, my
uncle's advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will
immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness."

"Oh! where, where is my uncle?" cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing
a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous
manner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak,
she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia's situation,
hastily exclaimed, "I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find
Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not
an instant to lose."

"Good God! what is the matter?" cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, "I will not detain you a minute;
but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are
not well enough; you cannot go yourself."

Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless
an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
mistress home instantly.

On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, and
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
"Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill."

"No, I thank you," she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. "There
is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn."

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate
silence. At length she spoke again. "I have just had a letter from Jane,
with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My younger
sister has left all her friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into
the power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton.
_You_ know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no
connections, nothing that can tempt him to--she is lost for ever."

Darcy was fixed in astonishment. "When I consider," she added in a yet
more agitated voice, "that I might have prevented it! I, who knew what
he was. Had I but explained some part of it only--some part of what I
learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not
have happened. But it is all--all too late now."

"I am grieved indeed," cried Darcy; "grieved--shocked. But is it
certain--absolutely certain?"

"Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to
Scotland."

"And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?"

"My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's
immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But
nothing can be done--I know very well that nothing can be done. How is
such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have
not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!"

Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.

"When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character--Oh! had I known what
I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too
much. Wretched, wretched mistake!"

Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking
up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air
gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her
power was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither
wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
him, as now, when all love must be vain.

But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed
up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by
the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, "I am afraid you have been
long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my
stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything
could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to
such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may
seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I
fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley
to-day."

"Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as
long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long."

He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only
one serious, parting look, went away.

As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as
had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full
of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
formerly have rejoiced in its termination.

If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth's
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if
otherwise--if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on
a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other
less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him
go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must
produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched
business. Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had she entertained
a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought,
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least
of her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first
letter remained in her mind, she was all surprise--all astonishment that
Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry
for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared
incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment
as this she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose
Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention
of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue
nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.

She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions
raised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually been
fluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she now
feel it!

She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, her uncle's interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's
account that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them
instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their
summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript
of the last with trembling energy.--Though Lydia had never been a
favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply
afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the
first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promised every
assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked
him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit,
everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to
be off as soon as possible. "But what is to be done about Pemberley?"
cried Mrs. Gardiner. "John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for
us; was it so?"

"Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
_That_ is all settled."

"What is all settled?" repeated the other, as she ran into her room to
prepare. "And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!"

But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.



Chapter 47


"I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth," said her uncle, as they
drove from the town; "and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the
matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should
form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel's family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is
not adequate to the risk!"

"Do you really think so?" cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.

"Upon my word," said Mrs. Gardiner, "I begin to be of your uncle's
opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill of
Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe
him capable of it?"

"Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other
neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I
dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had been
the case?"

"In the first place," replied Mr. Gardiner, "there is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland."

"Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such
a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
Barnet road."

"Well, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London than in Scotland."

"But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their
marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particular
friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded of his never intending
to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He
cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia--what attraction has she
beyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him, for her sake,
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has
no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father's
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would
do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter."

"But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him
as to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?"

"It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed," replied Elizabeth, with
tears in her eyes, "that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.
Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has never
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,
nay, for a twelvemonth--she has been given up to nothing but amusement
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been doing
everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
greater--what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are
naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of
person and address that can captivate a woman."

"But you see that Jane," said her aunt, "does not think so very ill of
Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt."

"Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is
as false and deceitful as he is insinuating."

"And do you really know all this?" cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.

"I do indeed," replied Elizabeth, colouring. "I told you, the other day,
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when last at
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved
with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From
what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
her."

"But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you
and Jane seem so well to understand?"

"Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could
it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the
neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was
settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening
her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could be
in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a
consequence as _this_ could ensue, you may easily believe, was far
enough from my thoughts."

"When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?"

"Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all
were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for
the first two months; but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites."

                          * * * * *

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent.
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find
no interval of ease or forgetfulness.

They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one night
on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a
comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied
by long expectations.

The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.

Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her
mother's apartment, immediately met her.

Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives.

"Not yet," replied Jane. "But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope
everything will be well."

"Is my father in town?"

"Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word."

"And have you heard from him often?"

"We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday to say
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I
particularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not write
again till he had something of importance to mention."

"And my mother--how is she? How are you all?"

"My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
shaken. She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank
Heaven, are quite well."

"But you--how are you?" cried Elizabeth. "You look pale. How much you
must have gone through!"

Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach
of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.

When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of
good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yet
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.

Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes'
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the
errors of her daughter must principally be owing.

"If I had been able," said she, "to carry my point in going to Brighton,
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but poor dear Lydia
had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out
of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been
well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the
charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child!
And now here's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham,
wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become
of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his
grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we
shall do."

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.
Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.

"Do not give way to useless alarm," added he; "though it is right to be
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.
It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make
him come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done."

"Oh! my dear brother," replied Mrs. Bennet, "that is exactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,
after they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting.
Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my
wits--and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me--such
spasms in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that
I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to
give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does
not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I
know you will contrive it all."

But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well
in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her feelings on
the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.

Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
subject.

In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger
which she had herself incurred in this business, had given more of
fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was
mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:

"This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other the balm of sisterly consolation."

Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
"Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one
false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded in
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex."

Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed
to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.

In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for
half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of
the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject, by saying, "But tell me all and everything about it which
I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel
Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement
took place? They must have seen them together for ever."

"Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,
especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so
grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
first got abroad, it hastened his journey."

"And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of
their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?"

"Yes; but, when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of
their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying--and from _that_, I am
inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood before."

"And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?"

"How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt
a little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister's happiness with him
in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other, many weeks."

"But not before they went to Brighton?"

"No, I believe not."

"And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does
he know his real character?"

"I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly
did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad
affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt;
but I hope this may be false."

"Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him,
this could not have happened!"

"Perhaps it would have been better," replied her sister. "But to expose
the former faults of any person without knowing what their present
feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions."

"Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his
wife?"

"He brought it with him for us to see."

Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These
were the contents:

"MY DEAR HARRIET,

"You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who,
I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I
love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think
it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my
going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater,
when I write to them and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke
it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to
Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night.
Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will
dance with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall
send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell
Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are
packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will
drink to our good journey.

"Your affectionate friend,

"LYDIA BENNET."

"Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!" cried Elizabeth when she had
finished it. "What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment!
But at least it shows that _she_ was serious on the subject of their
journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her
side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!"

"I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
such confusion!"

"Oh! Jane," cried Elizabeth, "was there a servant belonging to it who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?"

"I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to
give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so
much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen
almost took from me my faculties."

"Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look
well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety
upon yourself alone."

"Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them.
Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours
of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn
on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all. And
Lady Lucas has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters', if
they should be of use to us."

"She had better have stayed at home," cried Elizabeth; "perhaps she
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see
too little of one's neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied."

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.

"He meant I believe," replied Jane, "to go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if anything could
be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come
with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another might
be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
out even so much as this."



Chapter 48


The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.
They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.

When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could,
to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only
security for her husband's not being killed in a duel.

Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable
to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or irregularity,
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them.

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family.
Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world;
and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the
appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above
half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of
her sister's ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less
of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come
when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely
despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of
them.

Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a
letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street;
that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival,
but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was
eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Mr.
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised
to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:

"I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were
anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a
clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have
nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in
his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps,
Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any
other person."

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her
authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information
of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never
heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both
of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of
his companions in the ----shire might be able to give more information;
and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application
was a something to look forward to.

Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters
was the grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.

But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence,
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as
follows:

"MY DEAR SIR,

"I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from
Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself
sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in
your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because
proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be
wanting on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune--or that
may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the
most afflicting to a parent's mind. The death of your daughter would
have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to
be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte
informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time,
for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think
that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be
guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be,
you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined
by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to
whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that
this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of
all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says,
will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads
me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event
of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved
in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to
console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child
from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her
own heinous offense.

"I am, dear sir, etc., etc."

Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer from
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with whom he
kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one
living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he
had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of
particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore,
who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the
wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for
secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for
it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a
very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a
thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton.
He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more
formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars
from the Longbourn family. Jane heard them with horror. "A gamester!"
she cried. "This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it."

Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered
spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded
to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and
leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable
for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did
not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering
what her anxiety for his life had been before.

"What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?" she cried. "Sure he
will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham,
and make him marry her, if he comes away?"

As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she
and the children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet
came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.

Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His
name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and
the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their
being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had
received none since her return that could come from Pemberley.

The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from _that_, though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought,
one sleepless night out of two.

When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of
it.

It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, "Say
nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing,
and I ought to feel it."

"You must not be too severe upon yourself," replied Elizabeth.

"You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone
to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have
been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
It will pass away soon enough."

"Do you suppose them to be in London?"

"Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?"

"And Lydia used to want to go to London," added Kitty.

"She is happy then," said her father drily; "and her residence there
will probably be of some duration."

Then after a short silence he continued:

"Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me
last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind."

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother's
tea.

"This is a parade," he cried, "which does one good; it gives such an
elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my
library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as
I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away."

"I am not going to run away, papa," said Kitty fretfully. "If I should
ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia."

"_You_ go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and
you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter into
my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be
absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.
And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have
spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner."

Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.

"Well, well," said he, "do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them."



Chapter 49


Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, "I beg your pardon,
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask."

"What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town."

"Dear madam," cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, "don't you know
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here
this half-hour, and master has had a letter."

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the
library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said:

"If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards the
little copse."

Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once
more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.

Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath,
came up with him, and eagerly cried out:

"Oh, papa, what news--what news? Have you heard from my uncle?"

"Yes I have had a letter from him by express."

"Well, and what news does it bring--good or bad?"

"What is there of good to be expected?" said he, taking the letter from
his pocket. "But perhaps you would like to read it."

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.

"Read it aloud," said their father, "for I hardly know myself what it is
about."

"Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2.

"MY DEAR BROTHER,

"At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as,
upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you
left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of
London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough
to know they are discovered. I have seen them both--"

"Then it is as I always hoped," cried Jane; "they are married!"

Elizabeth read on:

"I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there
was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the
engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will
not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure
to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand
pounds secured among your children after the decease of yourself and
my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her,
during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions
which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with,
as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by
express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You
will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's
circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be.
The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there
will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to
settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude
will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout
the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to
Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the
smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at
Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as
fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it
best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope
you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as
anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,

"EDW. GARDINER."

"Is it possible?" cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. "Can it be
possible that he will marry her?"

"Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him," said her
sister. "My dear father, I congratulate you."

"And have you answered the letter?" cried Elizabeth.

"No; but it must be done soon."

Most earnestly did she then entreaty him to lose no more time before he
wrote.

"Oh! my dear father," she cried, "come back and write immediately.
Consider how important every moment is in such a case."

"Let me write for you," said Jane, "if you dislike the trouble
yourself."

"I dislike it very much," he replied; "but it must be done."

And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

"And may I ask--" said Elizabeth; "but the terms, I suppose, must be
complied with."

"Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little."

"And they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man!"

"Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there
are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much money
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever
to pay him."

"Money! My uncle!" cried Jane, "what do you mean, sir?"

"I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a
temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone."

"That is very true," said Elizabeth; "though it had not occurred to me
before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh!
it must be my uncle's doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has
distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this."

"No," said her father; "Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a farthing
less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to think so ill of him,
in the very beginning of our relationship."

"Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
repaid?"

Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.

"And they are really to be married!" cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves. "How strange this is! And for _this_ we are to be
thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!"

"I comfort myself with thinking," replied Jane, "that he certainly would
not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind
uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children
of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand
pounds?"

"If he were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been," said
Elizabeth, "and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never
be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is
actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now,
she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she
first sees my aunt!"

"We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side," said
Jane: "I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to
marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten."

"Their conduct has been such," replied Elizabeth, "as neither you, nor
I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it."

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make
it known to her. He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly
replied:

"Just as you please."

"May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?"

"Take whatever you like, and get away."

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went up stairs
together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication
would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As
soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's being soon
married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she
had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter
would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her
felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

"My dear, dear Lydia!" she cried. "This is delightful indeed! She will
be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen!
My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage
everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him
how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell,
Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear
Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!"

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr.
Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.

"For we must attribute this happy conclusion," she added, "in a great
measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to
assist Mr. Wickham with money."

"Well," cried her mother, "it is all very right; who should do it but
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy!
In a short time I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well
it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in
such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and
you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately."

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.

"I will go to Meryton," said she, "as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call
on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding."

Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.

Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was
no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in
looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could
be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had
feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had
gained.



Chapter 50


Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life that,
instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever
of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be
her husband might then have rested in its proper place.

He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.

When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly
useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
Bennet, for many years after Lydia's birth, had been certain that he
would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then
too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her
husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
income.

Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and
the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with
regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother,
though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would
be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her
through her mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within
that sum.

That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was
another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as
little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports
of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he
naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon
dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick
in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he
was indebted to his brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any
message to her.

The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage
of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant
farmhouse. But there was much to be talked of in marrying her; and the
good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded before from
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit
in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery
was considered certain.

It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on this
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object
of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance.

"Haye Park might do," said she, "if the Gouldings could quit it--or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful."

Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her: "Mrs.
Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the
impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn."

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm. It
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend
it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable
resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could believe
possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
took place.

Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the
proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
spot.

She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were
few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended;
but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister's
frailty would have mortified her so much--not, however, from any fear
of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate,
there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia's marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other
objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the
nearest kind with a man whom he so justly scorned.

From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The
wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she
hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no
longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they
should meet.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the
proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now
have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal,
there must be a triumph.

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved;
and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she
must have received benefit of greater importance.

But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family.

How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence,
she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could
belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions
were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.

                          * * * * *

Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia.

"It was greatly my wish that he should do so," he added, "as soon as
his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in
considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on
his account and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go into
the regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who
are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an
ensigncy in General ----'s regiment, now quartered in the North. It
is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements,
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham
in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I
have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying
similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin
a list according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I
hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions,
and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.
Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she
leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to
you and her mother.--Yours, etc.,

"E. GARDINER."

Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal
from the ----shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet
was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the North,
just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company,
for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted
with everybody, and had so many favourites.

"She is so fond of Mrs. Forster," said she, "it will be quite shocking
to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she
likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General ----'s
regiment."

His daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into her family again before she set off for the North,
received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth,
who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and
consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents,
urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show
her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the
North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent
his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon as
the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was
surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and
had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would
have been the last object of her wishes.



Chapter 51


Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her
probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to
meet them at ----, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially,
who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister
must endure.

They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive
them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drove up to
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
anxious, uneasy.

Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile,
to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an
alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.

Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet
was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy,
and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their
congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly
round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and
observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been
there.

Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners
were always so pleasing, that had his character and his marriage been
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had
not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down,
resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence
of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the
two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.

There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable to equal in her
replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for
the world.

"Only think of its being three months," she cried, "since I went away;
it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was."

Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, "Oh! mamma, do the
people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not;
and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he
should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to him, and took
off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that
he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything."

Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her say
to her eldest sister, "Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go
lower, because I am a married woman."

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and
all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called "Mrs. Wickham"
by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her
ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.

"Well, mamma," said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast
room, "and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I
am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half
my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get
husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go."

"Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don't
at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?"

"Oh, lord! yes;--there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all
things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We
shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all."

"I should like it beyond anything!" said her mother.

"And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
winter is over."

"I thank you for my share of the favour," said Elizabeth; "but I do not
particularly like your way of getting husbands."

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join
his regiment at the end of a fortnight.

No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and
having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think, than such as did not.

Wickham's affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected
to find it; not equal to Lydia's for him. She had scarcely needed her
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity
of having a companion.

Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every
thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on
the first of September, than any body else in the country.

One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two
elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:

"Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. You
were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you
curious to hear how it was managed?"

"No really," replied Elizabeth; "I think there cannot be too little said
on the subject."

"La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were
married, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in
that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in
such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to
put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was
my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as
if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in
ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed
to know whether he would be married in his blue coat."

"Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so
just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon
business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once
they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I
did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we
were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he
came back again in ten minutes' time, and then we all set out. However,
I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented going, the
wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well."

"Mr. Darcy!" repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

"Oh, yes!--he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious
me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!"

"If it was to be secret," said Jane, "say not another word on the
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further."

"Oh! certainly," said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; "we will
ask you no questions."

"Thank you," said Lydia, "for if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be angry."

On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her
power, by running away.

But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least
it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at
her sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what
Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended.

"You may readily comprehend," she added, "what my curiosity must be
to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively
speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems
to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
ignorance."

"Not that I _shall_, though," she added to herself, as she finished
the letter; "and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out."

Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad
of it;--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.



Chapter 52


Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as
soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it
than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to
be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to
be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not
contain a denial.

"Gracechurch street, Sept. 6.

"MY DEAR NIECE,

"I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning
to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will not comprise
what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your
application; I did not expect it from _you_. Don't think me angry,
however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such
inquiries to be necessary on _your_ side. If you do not choose to
understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised
as I am--and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned
would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really
innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit.

"On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most
unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several
hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so
dreadfully racked as _yours_ seems to have been. He came to tell Mr.
Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were,
and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly,
Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day
after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for
them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to
make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide
in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and
confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private
actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He
called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy
an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he _had another_
motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days
in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to
direct his search, which was more than _we_ had; and the consciousness
of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.

"There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago
governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause
of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large
house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting
lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with
Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to
town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and
corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found.
Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and had
she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up
their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the
wished-for direction. They were in ---- street. He saw Wickham, and
afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he
acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed
on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go. But
he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared
for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear
of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or
other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings,
it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which,
in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never
been _his_ design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment,
on account of some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and
scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on her
own folly alone. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as
to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He
must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have
nothing to live on.

"Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once. Though
Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able
to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited by
marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still
cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in
some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely
to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.

"They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of
course wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be
reasonable.

"Every thing being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy's next step was to
make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch
street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not be
seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was
still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge
your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your
uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next
day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.

"On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home,
and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.

"They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It was not all
settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to
Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been
accused of many faults at different times, but _this_ is the true one.
Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and
I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your
uncle would most readily have settled the whole.

"They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either
the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle
was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his
niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,
which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter
this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation
that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where
it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane
at most.

"You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young
people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably
more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own
settled upon _her_, and his commission purchased. The reason why all
this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It
was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that
Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he
had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth
in _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody's_ reserve,
can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking,
my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would
never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for _another
interest_ in the affair.

"When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who
were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in
London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were
then to receive the last finish.

"I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which
you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not
afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant
admission to the house. _He_ was exactly what he had been, when I
knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was
satisfied with her behaviour while she staid with us, if I had not
perceived, by Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming
home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell
you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most
serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had
done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she
heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was
sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and
Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.

"Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you,
attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave
town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my
dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
enough to say before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us has,
in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His
understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little
more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his wife may teach
him. I thought him very sly;--he hardly ever mentioned your name. But
slyness seems the fashion.

"Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not
punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy
till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little
pair of ponies, would be the very thing.

"But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half
hour.

"Yours, very sincerely,

"M. GARDINER."

The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister's
match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too
great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the
pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true!
He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all
the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which
supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and
despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason
with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to
avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had
done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her
heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope shortly
checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her vanity
was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her--for
a woman who had already refused him--as able to overcome a sentiment so
natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law
of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had,
to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had
given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary
stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been
wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and
though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she
could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality for her might assist
his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially
concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were
under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They
owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh!
how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever
encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For
herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause
of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of himself.
She read over her aunt's commendation of him again and again. It
was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some
pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she
and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted
between Mr. Darcy and herself.

She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's
approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was
overtaken by Wickham.

"I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?" said he,
as he joined her.

"You certainly do," she replied with a smile; "but it does not follow
that the interruption must be unwelcome."

"I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and
now we are better."

"True. Are the others coming out?"

"I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley."

She replied in the affirmative.

"I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the
old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of
me. But of course she did not mention my name to you."

"Yes, she did."

"And what did she say?"

"That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely
misrepresented."

"Certainly," he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:

"I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other
several times. I wonder what he can be doing there."

"Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh," said
Elizabeth. "It must be something particular, to take him there at this
time of year."

"Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I
understood from the Gardiners that you had."

"Yes; he introduced us to his sister."

"And do you like her?"

"Very much."

"I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year
or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad
you liked her. I hope she will turn out well."

"I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age."

"Did you go by the village of Kympton?"

"I do not recollect that we did."

"I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A
most delightful place!--Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited
me in every respect."

"How should you have liked making sermons?"

"Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty,
and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to
repine;--but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The
quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas
of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance, when you were in Kent?"

"I have heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron."

"You have. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
first, you may remember."

"I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not
so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly."

"You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it."

They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast
to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke him,
she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:

"Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let
us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind."

She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.



Chapter 53


Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he
never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
had said enough to keep him quiet.

The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.

"Oh! my dear Lydia," she cried, "when shall we meet again?"

"Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps."

"Write to me very often, my dear."

"As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for
writing. My sisters may write to _me_. They will have nothing else to
do."

Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife's. He
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.

"He is as fine a fellow," said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, "as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to
us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law."

The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.

"I often think," said she, "that there is nothing so bad as parting with
one's friends. One seems so forlorn without them."

"This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter," said
Elizabeth. "It must make you better satisfied that your other four are
single."

"It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married,
but only because her husband's regiment happens to be so far off. If
that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon."

But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an
article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several
weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and
smiled and shook her head by turns.

"Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister," (for Mrs.
Phillips first brought her the news). "Well, so much the better. Not
that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am
sure _I_ never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome
to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen?
But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to
mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?"

"You may depend on it," replied the other, "for Mrs. Nicholls was in
Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He
comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was
going to the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed."

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing
colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:

"I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don't imagine it was from
any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that
I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect
me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes
alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of
_myself_, but I dread other people's remarks."

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there _with_ his friend's permission, or being bold enough to come
without it.

"Yet it is hard," she sometimes thought, "that this poor man cannot
come to a house which he has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself."

In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily
perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than she had often seen them.

The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

"As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "you
will wait on him of course."

"No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I
went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again."

His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to
Netherfield.

"'Tis an etiquette I despise," said he. "If he wants our society,
let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend my hours
in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
again."

"Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait
on him. But, however, that shan't prevent my asking him to dine here, I
am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for
him."

Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before
_they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--

"I begin to be sorry that he comes at all," said Jane to her sister. "It
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she
says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!"

"I wish I could say anything to comfort you," replied Elizabeth; "but it
is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction
of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have
always so much."

Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She counted
the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent;
hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his
arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him, from her dressing-room window,
enter the paddock and ride towards the house.

Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went
to the window--she looked,--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by her sister.

"There is a gentleman with him, mamma," said Kitty; "who can it be?"

"Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
know."

"La!" replied Kitty, "it looks just like that man that used to be with
him before. Mr. what's-his-name. That tall, proud man."

"Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of
Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must
say that I hate the very sight of him."

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time
after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be
civil to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being heard by either
of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs.
Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him.
To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,
and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just as
what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered
behaviour in Derbyshire.

The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure.

"Let me first see how he behaves," said she; "it will then be early
enough for expectation."

She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of
her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the
gentlemen's appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.

Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious, as usual; and,
she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as
she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother's
presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but
not an improbable, conjecture.

Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs.
Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
her curtsey and address to his friend.

Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter
the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy,
was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
applied.

Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question
which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely anything. He
was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends,
when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed without
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but
the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when
they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry
with herself for being so.

"Could I expect it to be otherwise!" said she. "Yet why did he come?"

She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to
him she had hardly courage to speak.

She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.

"It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away," said Mrs. Bennet.

He readily agreed to it.

"I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People _did_ say
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood,
since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my
own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have
seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The Courier, I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, 'Lately,
George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there being a
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.
It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to
make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?"

Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth
dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could
not tell.

"It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,"
continued her mother, "but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very
hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay
I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have
heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the
regulars. Thank Heaven! he has _some_ friends, though perhaps not so
many as he deserves."

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such
misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her,
however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually
done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in
the country at present. A few weeks, he believed.

"When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley," said her mother,
"I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr.
Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the covies for you."

Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had
flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for
moments of such painful confusion.

"The first wish of my heart," said she to herself, "is never more to
be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either
one or the other again!"

Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her
former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little;
but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He
found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good natured, and
as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
that she talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged,
that she did not always know when she was silent.

When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days time.

"You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley," she added, "for when
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with
us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure
you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep
your engagement."

Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.

Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did
not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride
of one who had ten thousand a year.



Chapter 54


As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;
or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that
must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.

"Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," said she,
"did he come at all?"

She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.

"He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when
he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If
he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will
think no more about him."

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which showed her
better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.

"Now," said she, "that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly
seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent
acquaintance."

"Yes, very indifferent indeed," said Elizabeth, laughingly. "Oh, Jane,
take care."

"My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?"

"I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with
you as ever."

                          * * * * *

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good
humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had
revived.

On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality
as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by
her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore
to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
decided. He placed himself by her.

Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend.
He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an
admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded
Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his
own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness,
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind;
and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell
him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the
family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than
the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious
and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the
gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her
uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all
her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.

"If he does not come to me, _then_," said she, "I shall give him up for
ever."

The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her
which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:

"The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;
do we?"

Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with
her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough
to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for
being so silly!

"A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to
expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!"

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee cup
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:

"Is your sister at Pemberley still?"

"Yes, she will remain there till Christmas."

"And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?"

"Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough,
these three weeks."

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse
with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering
to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies
all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him,
when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.

Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.

"Well girls," said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, "What
say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well,
I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said they never saw so
fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French
cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And
what do you think she said besides? 'Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her
at Netherfield at last.' She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good
a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls,
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously."

Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of
Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get him at
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.

"It has been a very agreeable day," said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. "The
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we
may often meet again."

Elizabeth smiled.

"Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me.
I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am
perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed
with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleasing, than any other man."

"You are very cruel," said her sister, "you will not let me smile, and
are provoking me to it every moment."

"How hard it is in some cases to be believed!"

"And how impossible in others!"

"But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?"

"That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante."



Chapter 55


A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.

"Next time you call," said she, "I hope we shall be more lucky."

He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she would
give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.

"Can you come to-morrow?"

Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was
accepted with alacrity.

He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them
dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter's room, in her dressing
gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:

"My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is
come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss
Lizzy's hair."

"We will be down as soon as we can," said Jane; "but I dare say Kitty is
forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago."

"Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be quick!
Where is your sash, my dear?"

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
without one of her sisters.

The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the
evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of
the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, "What is the matter mamma? What do
you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?"

"Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you." She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, "Come here, my love, I want to
speak to you," took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look
at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her
entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs.
Bennet half-opened the door and called out:

"Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you."

Elizabeth was forced to go.

"We may as well leave them by themselves you know;" said her mother, as
soon as she was in the hall. "Kitty and I are going up stairs to sit in
my dressing-room."

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room.

Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was every
thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His
ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the
mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command
of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went
away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs.
Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.

After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in
the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman's
concurrence.

Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent
the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more
agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption
or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the
other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get
every body away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter
to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea;
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be
wanted to counteract her mother's schemes.

But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she
saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother
had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her
sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in
earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of
both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would
have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ she
thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as
well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
words to her sister, ran out of the room.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give
pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.

"'Tis too much!" she added, "by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh!
why is not everybody as happy?"

Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth,
a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be
said for the present.

"I must go instantly to my mother;" she cried. "I would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! how shall I bear so much happiness!"

She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the
card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.

Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
previous months of suspense and vexation.

"And this," said she, "is the end of all his friend's anxious
circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the
happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!"

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her
father had been short and to the purpose.

"Where is your sister?" said he hastily, as he opened the door.

"With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say."

He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes
and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed
her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane's perfections;
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
himself.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Miss Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as
made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or
speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings,
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
how really happy he was.

Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he
turned to his daughter, and said:

"Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman."

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness.

"You are a good girl;" he replied, "and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your
doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
always exceed your income."

"I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be
unpardonable in me."

"Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet," cried his wife, "what are you
talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely
more." Then addressing her daughter, "Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I am so
happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it
would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was
that you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!"

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her
favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense.

Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.

Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough
detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself
obliged to accept.

Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for
while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else;
but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those hours
of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he
always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of
relief.

"He has made me so happy," said she, one evening, "by telling me that he
was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed
it possible."

"I suspected as much," replied Elizabeth. "But how did he account for
it?"

"It must have been his sister's doing. They were certainly no friends to
his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we
can never be what we once were to each other."

"That is the most unforgiving speech," said Elizabeth, "that I ever
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again
the dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard."

"Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November,
he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being
indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!"

"He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty."

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was pleased
to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for,
though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she
knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.

"I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!" cried
Jane. "Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all! If I could but see _you_ as happy! If there _were_ but
such another man for you!"

"If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as
you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time."

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips,
and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton.

The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.



Chapter 56


One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane had been
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up
the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.

She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her
name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.

Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting
for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,

"I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother."

Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.

"And _that_ I suppose is one of your sisters."

"Yes, madam," said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to Lady Catherine.
"She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married,
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family."

"You have a very small park here," returned Lady Catherine after a short
silence.

"It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I
assure you it is much larger than Sir William Lucas's."

"This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in
summer; the windows are full west."

Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and then
added:

"May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and
Mrs. Collins well."

"Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last."

Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.

Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,

"Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you
will favour me with your company."

"Go, my dear," cried her mother, "and show her ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage."

Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the
hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent
looking rooms, walked on.

Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and
disagreeable.

"How could I ever think her like her nephew?" said she, as she looked in
her face.

As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
manner:--

"You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
come."

Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

"Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to account
for the honour of seeing you here."

"Miss Bennet," replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, "you ought to
know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may
choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most
alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon
afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved
on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to
you."

"If you believed it impossible to be true," said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, "I wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?"

"At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted."

"Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family," said Elizabeth
coolly, "will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report
is in existence."

"If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?"

"I never heard that it was."

"And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?"

"I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship. You may
ask questions which I shall not choose to answer."

"This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has
he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?"

"Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible."

"It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his
reason. But your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You
may have drawn him in."

"If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it."

"Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such
language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns."

"But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this,
ever induce me to be explicit."

"Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is
engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?"

"Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will
make an offer to me."

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:

"The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we planned
the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would
be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his
tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest
hours he was destined for his cousin?"

"Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is
no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not
be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to
marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither
by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?"

"Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes,
Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will
be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.
Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned
by any of us."

"These are heavy misfortunes," replied Elizabeth. "But the wife of Mr.
Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repine."

"Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude
for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that
score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will
I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person's
whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment."

"_That_ will make your ladyship's situation at present more pitiable;
but it will have no effect on me."

"I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient--though untitled--families. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?
The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections,
or fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you
were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in
which you have been brought up."

"In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that
sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we are
equal."

"True. You _are_ a gentleman's daughter. But who was your mother?
Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their
condition."

"Whatever my connections may be," said Elizabeth, "if your nephew does
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_."

"Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?"

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a
moment's deliberation:

"I am not."

Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

"And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?"

"I will make no promise of the kind."

"Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more
reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that
I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require."

"And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into
anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make their
marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would
my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin?
Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have
supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the
application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if
you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your
nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell;
but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg,
therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject."

"Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am
no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous
elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a
patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is
such a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is her husband, is the son of his
late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are
you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?"

"You can now have nothing further to say," she resentfully answered.
"You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg to return to
the house."

And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.

"You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?"

"Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments."

"You are then resolved to have him?"

"I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner,
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me."

"It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world."

"Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude," replied Elizabeth, "have any
possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
_were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment's
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn."

"And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well.
I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your
ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you
reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point."

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, "I take no leave
of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve
no such attention. I am most seriously displeased."

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.

"She did not choose it," said her daughter, "she would go."

"She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously
civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were
well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?"

Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.



Chapter 57


The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report
of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply
the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her
sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours
at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had
only set that down as almost certain and immediate, which she had looked
forward to as possible at some future time.

In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting
in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate
an application to her nephew; and how _he_ might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that he thought much higher of her ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_,
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would
address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.

If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had often
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.

"If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his
friend within a few days," she added, "I shall know how to understand
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him
at all."

                          * * * * *

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.

The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.

"Lizzy," said he, "I was going to look for you; come into my room."

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to
tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it
might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the
consequent explanations.

She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He
then said,

"I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink
of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest."

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself; when her father continued:

"You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to discover the
name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins."

"From Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?"

"Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says
on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: 'Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another;
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may
be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in
this land.'

"Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?" 'This young
gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of
mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive
patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin
Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate
closure with this gentleman's proposals, which, of course, you will be
inclined to take immediate advantage of.'

"Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:

"'My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine
that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with
a friendly eye.'

"_Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his
life! It is admirable!"

Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only force
one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so
little agreeable to her.

"Are you not diverted?"

"Oh! yes. Pray read on."

"'After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some
family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her
consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and
her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.' Mr.
Collins moreover adds, 'I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally
known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them,
as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
names to be mentioned in your hearing.' That is his notion of Christian
forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte's
situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you
look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be _missish_,
I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we
live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our
turn?"

"Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I am excessively diverted. But it is so
strange!"

"Yes--_that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference, and _your_
pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any
consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?"

To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by
his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by
what he said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of
his seeing too little, she might have fancied too much.



Chapter 58


Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine's
visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time
to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat
in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed
their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the
habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others
to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty
was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a
desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the
moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was
high, she immediately said:

"Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding yours. I
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my
poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest
of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express."

"I am sorry, exceedingly sorry," replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise
and emotion, "that you have ever been informed of what may, in a
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner
was so little to be trusted."

"You must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first betrayed to
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them."

"If you _will_ thank me," he replied, "let it be for yourself alone.
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your
_family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
only of _you_."

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause,
her companion added, "You are too generous to trifle with me. If your
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_
affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever."

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone
so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The
happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had probably never
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth
been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the
expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over his face, became him;
but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of
feelings, which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his
affection every moment more valuable.

They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on
every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's apprehension,
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that
such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise
from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her
ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.

"It taught me to hope," said he, "as I had scarcely ever allowed myself
to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain that,
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly."

Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, "Yes, you know enough
of my frankness to believe me capable of _that_. After abusing you so
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all
your relations."

"What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my
behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was
unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence."

"We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening," said Elizabeth. "The conduct of neither, if strictly examined,
will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved
in civility."

"I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: 'had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.' Those were your words. You know not, you can
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;--though it was some time,
I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice."

"I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
a way."

"I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper
feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible
way that would induce you to accept me."

"Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at
all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it."

Darcy mentioned his letter. "Did it," said he, "did it soon make you
think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?"

She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually all her
former prejudices had been removed.

"I knew," said he, "that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part
especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the
power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might
justly make you hate me."

"The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies."

"When I wrote that letter," replied Darcy, "I believed myself perfectly
calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit."

"The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings
of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now
so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant
circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some
of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure."

"I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude
which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish
being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I
was taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I
was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt
by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all
that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught
me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own family
circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least
to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I
was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been
but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You
taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you,
I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception.
You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman
worthy of being pleased."

"Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?"

"Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be
wishing, expecting my addresses."

"My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure
you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me
wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening?"

"Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take
a proper direction."

"I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met at
Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?"

"No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise."

"Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you.
My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due."

"My object then," replied Darcy, "was to show you, by every civility in
my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to
obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you
see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an
hour after I had seen you."

He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness
there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.

She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to
each, to be dwelt on farther.

After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
it was time to be at home.

"What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!" was a wonder which
introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of
it.

"I must ask whether you were surprised?" said Elizabeth.

"Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen."

"That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much." And
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much
the case.

"On the evening before my going to London," said he, "I made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I
told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together."

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend.

"Did you speak from your own observation," said she, "when you told him
that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?"

"From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits
which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her affection."

"And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to
him."

"It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess
one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me
now."

Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful
friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked
herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at,
and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness
of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
parted.



Chapter 59


"My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?" was a question
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room,
and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to
say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own
knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.

The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt
in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no
one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.

At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far
from Miss Bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.

"You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!--engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no,
you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible."

"This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and
I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am
in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are
engaged."

Jane looked at her doubtingly. "Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much
you dislike him."

"You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I
did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as
these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself."

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously assured her of its truth.

"Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you," cried
Jane. "My dear, dear Lizzy, I would--I do congratulate you--but are you
certain? forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
happy with him?"

"There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that
we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased,
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?"

"Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you
really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than
marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought
to do?"

"Oh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do, when I
tell you all."

"What do you mean?"

"Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am
afraid you will be angry."

"My dearest sister, now _be_ serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let
me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me
how long you have loved him?"

"It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began.
But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds
at Pemberley."

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances
of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish.

"Now I am quite happy," said she, "for you will be as happy as myself.
I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you,
I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know
of it to another, not to you."

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling
to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer
conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was acknowledged,
and half the night spent in conversation.

                          * * * * *

"Good gracious!" cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
morning, "if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with
our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?
Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley's
way."

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an
epithet.

As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, "Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?"

"I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," said Mrs. Bennet, "to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
never seen the view."

"It may do very well for the others," replied Mr. Bingley; "but I am
sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?" Kitty owned that
she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see
the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went
up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying:

"I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is
all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking
to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to
inconvenience."

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be
asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit
to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear
the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
disapprobation.

                          * * * * *

In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was
extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going to
be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means--that _she_,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her--was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, "Go to your father, he
wants you in the library." She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
"Lizzy," said he, "what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?"

How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more
reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,
of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.

"Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.
But will they make you happy?"

"Have you any other objection," said Elizabeth, "than your belief of my
indifference?"

"None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
this would be nothing if you really liked him."

"I do, I do like him," she replied, with tears in her eyes, "I love him.
Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in
such terms."

"Lizzy," said her father, "I have given him my consent. He is the kind
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he
condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on
having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know
your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are
about."

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and
at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object
of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of
him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection
was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months'
suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did
conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.

"Well, my dear," said he, when she ceased speaking, "I have no more to
say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy."

To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy
had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.

"This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing;
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him
his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble
and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and _would_ have
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own
way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter."

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading
Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her
at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, "If any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure."

Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.

When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,
and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary;
for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to
utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could
comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit
what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

"Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would
have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich
and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
you will have! Jane's is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so
pleased--so happy. Such a charming man!--so handsome! so tall!--Oh, my
dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I
hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing
that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh,
Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted."

This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room,
her mother followed her.

"My dearest child," she cried, "I can think of nothing else! Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a
special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of,
that I may have it to-morrow."

This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations'
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to
him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her
deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get
acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising
every hour in his esteem.

"I admire all my three sons-in-law highly," said he. "Wickham, perhaps,
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
as Jane's."



Chapter 60


Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. "How could
you begin?" said she. "I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
place?"

"I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
knew that I _had_ begun."

"My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere;
did you admire me for my impertinence?"

"For the liveliness of your mind, I did."

"You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused, and
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really
amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for
it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
of _that_ when they fall in love."

"Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was
ill at Netherfield?"

"Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it
by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling
to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first
called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did
you look as if you did not care about me?"

"Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement."

"But I was embarrassed."

"And so was I."

"You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner."

"A man who had felt less, might."

"How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when
you _would_ have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution of
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
_Too much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject. This will never do."

"You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady
Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour
to wait for any opening of yours. My aunt's intelligence had given me
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing."

"Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequence?"

"My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to
myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley,
and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made."

"Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
befall her?"

"I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But it
ought to be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be
done directly."

"And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected."

From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy
had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's
long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and
aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
follows:

"I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the
truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to your
fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the
subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you
cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a
great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again,
for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your
idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours, etc."

Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still
different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply
to his last.

"DEAR SIR,

"I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon
be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can.
But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give.

"Yours sincerely, etc."

Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even
to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her
former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was
affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing
her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved.

The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information,
was as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
being loved by her sister.

Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered
so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of
her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. If he did
shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his
forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good
humour encouraged, yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be vulgar.
Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all
likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield
him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep
him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse
without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising
from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it
added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to
the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing
to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at
Pemberley.



Chapter 61


Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride
she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may
be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many
of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it
was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity
in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and
invariably silly.

Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her
drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in
going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his
sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally
known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example,
she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia's
society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite
unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own,
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
much reluctance.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite of every
thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on
to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received
from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by his wife at least,
if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this
effect:

"MY DEAR LIZZY,

"I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear
Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so
rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us.
I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not
think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help.
Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however,
do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.

"Yours, etc."

As it happened that Elizabeth had _much_ rather not, she endeavoured in
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called economy in her own private expences, she
frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance
towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap
situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection for
her soon sunk into indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
reputation which her marriage had given her.

Though Darcy could never receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for
Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was
occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself
in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently
staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour was overcome, and he
proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as she
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth.

Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each
other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with
an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen
in her way. By Elizabeth's instructions, she began to comprehend that
a woman may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.

Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion,
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait
on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.

With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.
